--- Paper: Kraska_2018.pdf ---

The Case for Learned Index Structures
Tim Kraska∗
MIT
Cambridge, MA
kraska@mit.edu
Alex Beutel
Google, Inc.
Mountain View, CA
alexbeutel@google.com
Ed H. Chi
Google, Inc.
Mountain View, CA
edchi@google.com
Jeffrey Dean
Google, Inc.
Mountain View, CA
jeff@google.com
Neoklis Polyzotis
Google, Inc.
Mountain View, CA
npolyzotis@google.com
Abstract
Indexes are models: a B-Tree-Index can be seen as a model to map a key to the position of a record
within a sorted array, a Hash-Index as a model to map a key to a position of a record within an unsorted
array, and a BitMap-Index as a model to indicate if a data record exists or not. In this exploratory research
paper, we start from this premise and posit that all existing index structures can be replaced with other
types of models, including deep-learning models, which we term learned indexes. The key idea is that
a model can learn the sort order or structure of lookup keys and use this signal to effectively predict
the position or existence of records. We theoretically analyze under which conditions learned indexes
outperform traditional index structures and describe the main challenges in designing learned index
structures. Our initial results show, that by using neural nets we are able to outperform cache-optimized
B-Trees by up to 70% in speed while saving an order-of-magnitude in memory over several real-world
data sets. More importantly though, we believe that the idea of replacing core components of a data
management system through learned models has far reaching implications for future systems designs and
that this work just provides a glimpse of what might be possible.
1
Introduction
Whenever efﬁcient data access is needed, index structures are the answer, and a wide variety of choices exist
to address the different needs of various access patterns. For example, B-Trees are the best choice for range
requests (e.g., retrieve all records in a certain time frame); Hash-maps are hard to beat in performance for
single key look-ups; and Bloom ﬁlters are typically used to check for record existence. Because of their
importance for database systems and many other applications, indexes have been extensively tuned over the
past decades to be more memory, cache and/or CPU efﬁcient [36, 59, 29, 11].
Yet, all of those indexes remain general purpose data structures; they assume nothing about the data
distribution and do not take advantage of more common patterns prevalent in real world data. For example,
if the goal is to build a highly-tuned system to store and query ranges of ﬁxed-length records over a set of
continuous integer keys (e.g., the keys 1 to 100M), one would not use a conventional B-Tree index over
the keys since the key itself can be used as an offset, making it an O(1) rather than O(log n) operation to
look-up any key or the beginning of a range of keys. Similarly, the index memory size would be reduced
∗Work done while author was afﬁliated with Google.
1
arXiv:1712.01208v3  [cs.DB]  30 Apr 2018


from O(n) to O(1). Maybe surprisingly, similar optimizations are possible for other data patterns. In other
words, knowing the exact data distribution enables highly optimizing almost any index structure.
Of course, in most real-world use cases the data do not perfectly follow a known pattern and the
engineering effort to build specialized solutions for every use case is usually too high. However, we argue
that machine learning (ML) opens up the opportunity to learn a model that reﬂects the patterns in the data
and thus to enable the automatic synthesis of specialized index structures, termed learned indexes, with low
engineering cost.
In this paper, we explore the extent to which learned models, including neural networks, can be used
to enhance, or even replace, traditional index structures from B-Trees to Bloom ﬁlters. This may seem
counterintuitive because ML cannot provide the semantic guarantees we traditionally associate with these
indexes, and because the most powerful ML models, neural networks, are traditionally thought of as being
very compute expensive. Yet, we argue that none of these apparent obstacles are as problematic as they might
seem. Instead, our proposal to use learned models has the potential for signiﬁcant beneﬁts, especially on the
next generation of hardware.
In terms of semantic guarantees, indexes are already to a large extent learned models making it surprisingly
straightforward to replace them with other types of ML models. For example, a B-Tree can be considered
as a model which takes a key as an input and predicts the position of a data record in a sorted set (the data
has to be sorted to enable efﬁcient range requests). A Bloom ﬁlter is a binary classiﬁer, which based on
a key predicts if a key exists in a set or not. Obviously, there exists subtle but important differences. For
example, a Bloom ﬁlter can have false positives but not false negatives. However, as we will show in this
paper, it is possible to address these differences through novel learning techniques and/or simple auxiliary
data structures.
In terms of performance, we observe that every CPU already has powerful SIMD capabilities and we
speculate that many laptops and mobile phones will soon have a Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) or Tensor
Processing Unit (TPU). It is also reasonable to speculate that CPU-SIMD/GPU/TPUs will be increasingly
powerful as it is much easier to scale the restricted set of (parallel) math operations used by neural nets than a
general purpose instruction set. As a result the high cost to execute a neural net or other ML models might
actually be negligible in the future. For instance, both Nvidia and Google’s TPUs are already able to perform
thousands if not tens of thousands of neural net operations in a single cycle [3]. Furthermore, it was stated that
GPUs will improve 1000× in performance by 2025, whereas Moore’s law for CPUs is essentially dead [5].
By replacing branch-heavy index structures with neural networks, databases and other systems can beneﬁt
from these hardware trends. While we see the future of learned index structures on specialized hardware, like
TPUs, this paper focuses entirely on CPUs and surprisingly shows that we can achieve signiﬁcant advantages
even in this case.
It is important to note that we do not argue to completely replace traditional index structures with
learned indexes. Rather, the main contribution of this paper is to outline and evaluate the potential
of a novel approach to build indexes, which complements existing work and, arguably, opens up an
entirely new research direction for a decades-old ﬁeld. This is based on the key observation that many
data structures can be decomposed into a learned model and an auxiliary structure to provide the same
semantic guarantees. The potential power of this approach comes from the fact that continuous functions,
describing the data distribution, can be used to build more efﬁcient data structures or algorithms. We
empirically get very promising results when evaluating our approach on synthetic and real-world datasets
for read-only analytical workloads. However, many open challenges still remain, such as how to handle
write-heavy workloads, and we outline many possible directions for future work. Furthermore, we believe
that we can use the same principle to replace other components and operations commonly used in (database)
systems. If successful, the core idea of deeply embedding learned models into algorithms and data structures
could lead to a radical departure from the way systems are currently developed.
The remainder of this paper is outlined as follows: In the next two sections we introduce the general
2


BTree
Key
pos
pos - 0
pos + pagezise
…
…
pos
pos - min_err
pos + max_er
…
…
Model 
(e.g., NN)
(b) Learned Index
(a) B-Tree Index
Key
Figure 1: Why B-Trees are models
idea of learned indexes using B-Trees as an example. In Section 4 we extend this idea to Hash-maps and in
Section 5 to Bloom ﬁlters. All sections contain a separate evaluation. Finally in Section 6 we discuss related
work and conclude in Section 7.
2
Range Index
Range index structure, like B-Trees, are already models: given a key, they “predict” the location of a value
within a key-sorted set. To see this, consider a B-Tree index in an analytics in-memory database (i.e.,
read-only) over the sorted primary key column as shown in Figure 1(a). In this case, the B-Tree provides a
mapping from a look-up key to a position inside the sorted array of records with the guarantee that the key of
the record at that position is the ﬁrst key equal or higher than the look-up key. The data has to be sorted to
allow for efﬁcient range requests. This same general concept also applies to secondary indexes where the
data would be the list of <key,record pointer> pairs with the key being the indexed value and the
pointer a reference to the record.1
For efﬁciency reasons it is common not to index every single key of the sorted records, rather only the
key of every n-th record, i.e., the ﬁrst key of a page. Here we only assume ﬁxed-length records and logical
paging over a continuous memory region, i.e., a single array, not physical pages which are located in different
memory regions (physical pages and variable length records are discussed in Appendix D.2). Indexing only
the ﬁrst key of every page helps to signiﬁcantly reduce the number of keys the index has to store without
any signiﬁcant performance penalty. Thus, the B-Tree is a model, or in ML terminology, a regression tree:
it maps a key to a position with a min- and max-error (a min-error of 0 and a max-error of the page-size),
with a guarantee that the key can be found in that region if it exists. Consequently, we can replace the index
with other types of ML models, including neural nets, as long as they are also able to provide similar strong
guarantees about the min- and max-error.
At ﬁrst sight it may seem hard to provide the same guarantees with other types of ML models, but it
is actually surprisingly simple. First, the B-Tree only provides the strong min- and max-error guarantee
over the stored keys, not for all possible keys. For new data, B-Trees need to be re-balanced, or in machine
learning terminology re-trained, to still be able to provide the same error guarantees. That is, for monotonic
models the only thing we need to do is to execute the model for every key and remember the worst over- and
1Note, that against some deﬁnitions for secondary indexes we do not consider the <key,record pointer> pairs as part
of the index; rather for secondary index the data are the <key,record pointer> pairs. This is similar to how indexes are
implemented in key value stores [12, 21] or how B-Trees on modern hardware are designed [44].
3


under-prediction of a position to calculate the min- and max-error.2 Second, and more importantly, the strong
error bounds are not even needed. The data has to be sorted anyway to support range requests, so any error is
easily corrected by a local search around the prediction (e.g., using exponential search) and thus, even allows
for non-monotonic models. Consequently, we are able to replace B-Trees with any other type of regression
model, including linear regression or neural nets (see Figure 1(b)).
Now, there are other technical challenges that we need to address before we can replace B-Trees with
learned indexes. For instance, B-Trees have a bounded cost for inserts and look-ups and are particularly good
at taking advantage of the cache. Also, B-Trees can map keys to pages which are not continuously mapped to
memory or disk. All of these are interesting challenges/research questions and are explained in more detail,
together with potential solutions, throughout this section and in the appendix.
At the same time, using other types of models as indexes can provide tremendous beneﬁts. Most
importantly, it has the potential to transform the log n cost of a B-Tree look-up into a constant operation.
For example, assume a dataset with 1M unique keys with a value from 1M and 2M (so the value 1,000,009
is stored at position 10). In this case, a simple linear model, which consists of a single multiplication and
addition, can perfectly predict the position of any key for a point look-up or range scan, whereas a B-Tree
would require log n operations. The beauty of machine learning, especially neural nets, is that they are able
to learn a wide variety of data distributions, mixtures and other data peculiarities and patterns. The challenge
is to balance the complexity of the model with its accuracy.
For most of the discussion in this paper, we keep the simpliﬁed assumptions of this section: we only
index an in-memory dense array that is sorted by key. This may seem restrictive, but many modern hardware
optimized B-Trees, e.g., FAST [44], make exactly the same assumptions, and these indexes are quite common
for in-memory database systems for their superior performance [44, 48] over scanning or binary search.
However, while some of our techniques translate well to some scenarios (e.g., disk-resident data with very
large blocks, for example, as used in Bigtable [23]), for other scenarios (ﬁne grained paging, insert-heavy
workloads, etc.) more research is needed. In Appendix D.2 we discuss some of those challenges and potential
solutions in more detail.
2.1
What Model Complexity Can We Afford?
To better understand the model complexity, it is important to know how many operations can be performed in
the same amount of time it takes to traverse a B-Tree, and what precision the model needs to achieve to be
more efﬁcient than a B-Tree.
Consider a B-Tree that indexes 100M records with a page-size of 100. We can think of every B-Tree node
as a way to partition the space, decreasing the “error” and narrowing the region to ﬁnd the data. We therefore
say that the B-Tree with a page-size of 100 has a precision gain of 1/100 per node and we need to traverse
in total log100N nodes. So the ﬁrst node partitions the space from 100M to 100M/100 = 1M, the second
from 1M to 1M/100 = 10k and so on, until we ﬁnd the record. Now, traversing a single B-Tree page with
binary search takes roughly 50 cycles and is notoriously hard to parallelize3. In contrast, a modern CPU can
do 8-16 SIMD operations per cycle. Thus, a model will be faster as long as it has a better precision gain than
1/100 per 50 ∗8 = 400 arithmetic operations. Note that this calculation still assumes that all B-Tree pages
are in the cache. A single cache-miss costs 50-100 additional cycles and would thus allow for even more
complex models.
Additionally, machine learning accelerators are entirely changing the game. They allow to run much
more complex models in the same amount of time and ofﬂoad computation from the CPU. For example,
2The model has to be monotonic to also guarantee the min- and max-error for look-up keys, which do not exist in the stored set.
3There exist SIMD optimized index structures such as FAST [44], but they can only transform control dependencies to memory
dependencies. These are often signiﬁcantly slower than multiplications with simple in-cache data dependencies and as our experiments
show SIMD optimized index structures, like FAST, are not signiﬁcantly faster.
4


Pos
Key
Figure 2: Indexes as CDFs
NVIDIA’s latest Tesla V100 GPU is able to achieve 120 TeraFlops of low-precision deep learning arithmetic
operations (≈60, 000 operations per cycle). Assuming that the entire learned index ﬁts into the GPU’s
memory (we show in Section 3.7 that this is a very reasonable assumption), in just 30 cycles we could execute
1 million neural net operations. Of course, the latency for transferring the input and retrieving the result
from a GPU is still signiﬁcantly higher, but this problem is not insuperable given batching and/or the recent
trend to more closely integrate CPU/GPU/TPUs [4]. Finally, it can be expected that the capabilities and the
number of ﬂoating/int operations per second of GPUs/TPUs will continue to increase, whereas the progress
on increasing the performance of executing if-statements of CPUs essentially has stagnated [5]. Regardless
of the fact that we consider GPUs/TPUs as one of the main reasons to adopt learned indexes in practice, in
this paper we focus on the more limited CPUs to better study the implications of replacing and enhancing
indexes through machine learning without the impact of hardware changes.
2.2
Range Index Models are CDF Models
As stated in the beginning of the section, an index is a model that takes a key as an input and predicts the
position of the record. Whereas for point queries the order of the records does not matter, for range queries
the data has to be sorted according to the look-up key so that all data items in a range (e.g., in a time frame)
can be efﬁciently retrieved. This leads to an interesting observation: a model that predicts the position given a
key inside a sorted array effectively approximates the cumulative distribution function (CDF). We can model
the CDF of the data to predict the position as:
p = F(Key) ∗N
(1)
where p is the position estimate, F(Key) is the estimated cumulative distribution function for the data to
estimate the likelihood to observe a key smaller or equal to the look-up key P(X ≤Key), and N is the total
number of keys (see also Figure 2). This observation opens up a whole new set of interesting directions: First,
it implies that indexing literally requires learning a data distribution. A B-Tree “learns” the data distribution
by building a regression tree. A linear regression model would learn the data distribution by minimizing
the (squared) error of a linear function. Second, estimating the distribution for a dataset is a well known
problem and learned indexes can beneﬁt from decades of research. Third, learning the CDF plays also a key
role in optimizing other types of index structures and potential algorithms as we will outline later in this
paper. Fourth, there is a long history of research on how closely theoretical CDFs approximate empirical
CDFs that gives a foothold to theoretically understand the beneﬁts of this approach [28]. We give a high-level
theoretical analysis of how well our approach scales in Appendix A.
5


2.3
A First, Na¨ıve Learned Index
To better understand the requirements to replace B-Trees through learned models, we used 200M web-server
log records with the goal of building a secondary index over the timestamps using Tensorﬂow [9]. We trained
a two-layer fully-connected neural network with 32 neurons per layer using ReLU activation functions; the
timestamps are the input features and the positions in the sorted array are the labels. Afterwards we measured
the look-up time for a randomly selected key (averaged over several runs disregarding the ﬁrst numbers) with
Tensorﬂow and Python as the front-end.
In this setting we achieved ≈1250 predictions per second, i.e., it takes ≈80, 000 nano-seconds (ns)
to execute the model with Tensorﬂow, without the search time (the time to ﬁnd the actual record from the
predicted position). As a comparison point, a B-Tree traversal over the same data takes ≈300ns and binary
search over the entire data roughly ≈900ns. With a closer look, we ﬁnd our na¨ıve approach is limited in a
few key ways:
1. Tensorﬂow was designed to efﬁciently run larger models, not small models, and thus, has a signiﬁcant
invocation overhead, especially with Python as the front-end.
2. B-Trees, or decision trees in general, are really good in overﬁtting the data with a few operations as they
recursively divide the space using simple if-statements. In contrast, other models can be signiﬁcantly
more efﬁcient to approximate the general shape of a CDF, but have problems being accurate at the
individual data instance level. To see this, consider again Figure 2. The ﬁgure demonstrates, that from
a top-level view, the CDF function appears very smooth and regular. However, if one zooms in to the
individual records, more and more irregularities show; a well known statistical effect. Thus models
like neural nets, polynomial regression, etc. might be more CPU and space efﬁcient to narrow down
the position for an item from the entire dataset to a region of thousands, but a single neural net usually
requires signiﬁcantly more space and CPU time for the “last mile” to reduce the error further down
from thousands to hundreds.
3. B-Trees are extremely cache- and operation-efﬁcient as they keep the top nodes always in cache
and access other pages if needed. In contrast, standard neural nets require all weights to compute a
prediction, which has a high cost in the number of multiplications.
3
The RM-Index
In order to overcome the challenges and explore the potential of models as index replacements or optimizations,
we developed the learning index framework (LIF), recursive-model indexes (RMI), and standard-error-based
search strategies. We primarily focus on simple, fully-connected neural nets because of their simplicity and
ﬂexibility, but we believe other types of models may provide additional beneﬁts.
3.1
The Learning Index Framework (LIF)
The LIF can be regarded as an index synthesis system; given an index speciﬁcation, LIF generates different
index conﬁgurations, optimizes them, and tests them automatically. While LIF can learn simple models
on-the-ﬂy (e.g., linear regression models), it relies on Tensorﬂow for more complex models (e.g., NN).
However, it never uses Tensorﬂow at inference. Rather, given a trained Tensorﬂow model, LIF automatically
extracts all weights from the model and generates efﬁcient index structures in C++ based on the model
speciﬁcation. Our code-generation is particularly designed for small models and removes all unnecessary
overhead and instrumentation that Tensorﬂow has to manage the larger models. Here we leverage ideas
from [25], which already showed how to avoid unnecessary overhead from the Spark-runtime. As a result,
6


Model 1.1
Model 2.1
Model 2.2
Model 2.3
Model 3.1
Model 3.2
Model 3.3
Model 3.4
…
…
Stage 3     Stage 2   Stage 1
Position
Key
Figure 3: Staged models
we are able to execute simple models on the order of 30 nano-seconds. However, it should be pointed
out that LIF is still an experimental framework and is instrumentalized to quickly evaluate different index
conﬁgurations (e.g., ML models, page-sizes, search strategies, etc.), which introduces additional overhead in
form of additional counters, virtual function calls, etc. Also besides the vectorization done by the compiler,
we do not make use of special SIMD intrinisics. While these inefﬁciencies do not matter in our evaluation as
we ensure a fair comparison by always using our framework, for a production setting or when comparing
the reported performance numbers with other implementations, these inefﬁciencies should be taking into
account/be avoided.
3.2
The Recursive Model Index
As outlined in Section 2.3 one of the key challenges of building alternative learned models to replace B-Trees
is the accuracy for last-mile search. For example, reducing the prediction error to the order of hundreds from
100M records using a single model is often difﬁcult. At the same time, reducing the error to 10k from 100M,
e.g., a precision gain of 100 ∗100 = 10000 to replace the ﬁrst 2 layers of a B-Tree through a model, is much
easier to achieve even with simple models. Similarly, reducing the error from 10k to 100 is a simpler problem
as the model can focus only on a subset of the data.
Based on that observation and inspired by the mixture of experts work [62], we propose the recursive
regression model (see Figure 3). That is, we build a hierarchy of models, where at each stage the model takes
the key as an input and based on it picks another model, until the ﬁnal stage predicts the position. More
formally, for our model f(x) where x is the key and y ∈[0, N) the position, we assume at stage ℓthere
are Mℓmodels. We train the model at stage 0, f0(x) ≈y. As such, model k in stage ℓ, denoted by f(k)
ℓ
, is
trained with loss:
Lℓ=
X
(x,y)
(f (⌊Mℓfℓ−1(x)/N⌋)
ℓ
(x) −y)2
L0 =
X
(x,y)
(f0(x) −y)2
Note, we use here the notation of fℓ−1(x) recursively executing fℓ−1(x) = f(⌊Mℓ−1fℓ−2(x)/N⌋)
ℓ−1
(x). In
total, we iteratively train each stage with loss Lℓto build the complete model. One way to think about the
different models is that each model makes a prediction with a certain error about the position for the key and
that the prediction is used to select the next model, which is responsible for a certain area of the key-space
to make a better prediction with a lower error. However, recursive model indexes do not have to be trees.
7


As shown in Figure 3 it is possible that different models of one stage pick the same models at the stage
below. Furthermore, each model does not necessarily cover the same amount of records like B-Trees do
(i.e., a B-Tree with a page-size of 100 covers 100 or less records).4 Finally, depending on the used models
the predictions between the different stages can not necessarily be interpreted as positions estimates, rather
should be considered as picking an expert which has a better knowledge about certain keys (see also [62]).
This model architecture has several beneﬁts: (1) It separates model size and complexity from execution
cost. (2) It leverages the fact that it is easy to learn the overall shape of the data distribution. (3) It effectively
divides the space into smaller sub-ranges, like a B-Tree, to make it easier to achieve the required “last mile”
accuracy with fewer operations. (4) There is no search process required in-between the stages. For example,
the output of Model 1.1 is directly used to pick the model in the next stage. This not only reduces the
number of instructions to manage the structure, but also allows representing the entire index as a sparse
matrix-multiplication for a TPU/GPU.
3.3
Hybrid Indexes
Another advantage of the recursive model index is, that we are able to build mixtures of models. For example,
whereas on the top-layer a small ReLU neural net might be the best choice as they are usually able to learn a
wide-range of complex data distributions, the models at the bottom of the model hierarchy might be thousands
of simple linear regression models as they are inexpensive in space and execution time. Furthermore, we can
even use traditional B-Trees at the bottom stage if the data is particularly hard to learn.
For this paper, we focus on 2 types of models, simple neural nets with zero to two fully-connected hidden
layers and ReLU activation functions and a layer width of up to 32 neurons and B-Trees (a.k.a. decision
trees). Note, that a zero hidden-layer NN is equivalent to linear regression. Given an index conﬁguration,
which speciﬁes the number of stages and the number of models per stage as an array of sizes, the end-to-end
training for hybrid indexes is done as shown in Algorithm 1
Algorithm 1: Hybrid End-To-End Training
Input: int threshold, int stages[], NN complexity
Data: record data[], Model index[][]
Result: trained index
1 M = stages.size;
2 tmp records[][];
3 tmp records[1][1] = all data;
4 for i ←1 to M do
5
for j ←1 to stages[i] do
6
index[i][j] = new NN trained on tmp records[i][j];
7
if i < M then
8
for r ∈tmp records[i][j] do
9
p = index[i][j](r.key) / stages[i + 1];
10
tmp records[i + 1][p].add(r);
11 for j ←1 to index[M].size do
12
index[M][j].calc err(tmp records[M][j]);
13
if index[M][j].max abs err > threshold then
14
index[M][j] = new B-Tree trained on tmp records[M][j];
15 return index;
Starting from the entire dataset (line 3), it trains ﬁrst the top-node model. Based on the prediction of this
top-node model, it then picks the model from the next stage (lines 9 and 10) and adds all keys which fall into
4Note, that we currently train stage-wise and not fully end-to-end. End-to-end training would be even better and remains future
work.
8


that model (line 10). Finally, in the case of hybrid indexes, the index is optimized by replacing NN models
with B-Trees if absolute min-/max-error is above a predeﬁned threshold (lines 11-14).
Note, that we store the standard and min- and max-error for every model on the last stage. That has the
advantage, that we can individually restrict the search space based on the used model for every key. Currently,
we tune the various parameters of the model (i.e., number of stages, hidden layers per model, etc.) with a
simple simple grid-search. However, many potential optimizations exists to speed up the training process
from ML auto tuning to sampling.
Note, that hybrid indexes allow us to bound the worst case performance of learned indexes to the
performance of B-Trees. That is, in the case of an extremely difﬁcult to learn data distribution, all models
would be automatically replaced by B-Trees, making it virtually an entire B-Tree.
3.4
Search Strategies and Monotonicity
Range indexes usually implement an upper bound(key) [lower bound(key)] interface to ﬁnd the position
of the ﬁrst key within the sorted array that is equal or higher [lower] than the look-up key to efﬁciently
support range requests. For learned range indexes we therefore have to ﬁnd the ﬁrst key higher [lower] from
the look-up key based on the prediction. Despite many efforts, it was repeatedly reported [8] that binary
search or scanning for records with small payloads are usually the fastest strategies to ﬁnd a key within a
sorted array as the additional complexity of alternative techniques rarely pays off. However, learned indexes
might have an advantage here: the models actually predict the position of the key, not just the region (i.e.,
page) of the key. Here we discuss two simple search strategies which take advantage of this information:
Model Biased Search: Our default search strategy, which only varies from traditional binary search in
that the ﬁrst middle point is set to the value predicted by the model.
Biased Quaternary Search: Quaternary search takes instead of one split point three points with the
hope that the hardware pre-fetches all three data points at once to achieve better performance if the data
is not in cache. In our implementation, we deﬁned the initial three middle points of quaternary search as
pos −σ, pos, pos + σ. That is we make a guess that most of our predictions are accurate and focus our
attention ﬁrst around the position estimate and then we continue with traditional quaternary search.
For all our experiments we used the min- and max-error as the search area for all techniques. That is, we
executed the RMI model for every key and stored the worst over- and under-prediction per last-stage model.
While this technique guarantees to ﬁnd all existing keys, for non-existing keys it might return the wrong
upper or lower bound if the RMI model is not monotonic. To overcome this problem, one option is to force
our RMI model to be monotonic, as has been studied in machine learning [41, 71].
Alternatively, for non-monotonic models we can automatically adjust the search area. That is, if the
found upper (lower) bound key is on the boundary of the search area deﬁned by the min- and max-error,
we incrementally adjust the search area. Yet, another possibility is, to use exponential search techniques.
Assuming a normal distributed error, those techniques on average should work as good as alternative search
strategies while not requiring to store any min- and max-errors.
3.5
Indexing Strings
We have primarily focused on indexing real valued keys, but many databases rely on indexing strings, and
luckily, signiﬁcant machine learning research has focused on modeling strings. As before, we need to design
a model of strings that is efﬁcient yet expressive. Doing this well for strings opens a number of unique
challenges.
The ﬁrst design consideration is how to turn strings into features for the model, typically called tokeniza-
tion. For simplicity and efﬁciency, we consider an n-length string to be a feature vector x ∈Rn where xi is
the ASCII decimal value (or Unicode decimal value depending on the strings). Further, most ML models
9


Type
52.45 (4.00x) 274 (0.97x) 198 (72.3%) 51.93 (4.00x) 276 (0.94x) 201 (72.7%) 49.83 (4.00x) 274 (0.96x) 198 (72.1%)
26.23 (2.00x) 277 (0.96x) 172 (62.0%) 25.97 (2.00x) 274 (0.95x) 171 (62.4%) 24.92 (2.00x) 274 (0.96x) 169 (61.7%)
13.11 (1.00x) 265 (1.00x) 134 (50.8%) 12.98 (1.00x) 260 (1.00x) 132 (50.8%) 12.46 (1.00x) 263 (1.00x) 131 (50.0%)
6.56 (0.50x) 267 (0.99x) 114 (42.7%)
6.49 (0.50x) 266 (0.98x) 114 (42.9%)
6.23 (0.50x) 271 (0.97x) 117 (43.2%)
3.28 (0.25x) 286 (0.93x) 101 (35.3%)
3.25 (0.25x) 291 (0.89x) 100 (34.3%)
3.11 (0.25x) 293 (0.90x) 101 (34.5%)
2nd stage models:   10k
0.15 (0.01x)
98 (2.70x)
31 (31.6%)
0.15 (0.01x) 222 (1.17x)
29 (13.1%)
0.15 (0.01x) 178 (1.47x)
26 (14.6%)
0.76 (0.06x)
85 (3.11x)
39 (45.9%)
0.76 (0.06x) 162 (1.60x)
36 (22.2%)
0.76 (0.06x) 162 (1.62x)
35 (21.6%)
1.53 (0.12x)
82 (3.21x)
41 (50.2%)
1.53 (0.12x) 144 (1.81x)
39 (26.9%)
1.53 (0.12x) 152 (1.73x)
36 (23.7%)
3.05 (0.23x)
86 (3.08x)
50 (58.1%)
3.05 (0.24x) 126 (2.07x)
41 (32.5%)
3.05 (0.24x) 146 (1.79x)
40 (27.6%)
Learned 
Index
Map Data
Web Data
Log-Normal Data
Size (MB)
Lookup (ns)
Model (ns)
Size (MB)
Lookup (ns) Model (ns)
Size (MB)
Lookup (ns) Model (ns)
Btree
page size: 512
2nd stage models:   50k
2nd stage models: 100k
2nd stage models: 200k
Config
page size:   32
page size:   64
page size: 128
page size: 256
Figure 4: Learned Index vs B-Tree
operate more efﬁciently if all inputs are of equal size. As such, we will set a maximum input length N.
Because the data is sorted lexicographically, we will truncate the keys to length N before tokenization. For
strings with length n < N, we set xi = 0 for i > n.
For efﬁciency, we generally follow a similar modeling approach as we did for real valued inputs. We
learn a hierarchy of relatively small feed-forward neural networks. The one difference is that the input is
not a single real value x but a vector x. Linear models w · x + b scale the number of multiplications and
additions linearly with the input length N. Feed-forward neural networks with even a single hidden layer of
width h will scale O(hN) multiplications and additions.
Ultimately, we believe there is signiﬁcant future research that can optimize learned indexes for string
keys. For example, we could easily imagine other tokenization algorithms. There is a large body of research
in natural language processing on string tokenization to break strings into more useful segments for ML
models, e.g., wordpieces in translation [70]. Further, it might be interesting to combine the idea of sufﬁx-trees
with learned indexes as well as explore more complex model architectures (e.g., recurrent and convolutional
neural networks).
3.6
Training
While the training (i.e., loading) time is not the focus of this paper, it should be pointed out that all of our
models, shallow NNs or even simple linear/multi-variate regression models, train relatively fast. Whereas
simple NNs can be efﬁciently trained using stochastic gradient descent and can converge in less than one to
a few passes over the randomized data, a closed form solution exists for linear multi-variate models (e.g.,
also 0-layer NN) and they can be trained in a single pass over the sorted data. Therefore, for 200M records
training a simple RMI index does not take much longer than a few seconds, (of course, depending on how
much auto-tuning is performed); neural nets can train on the order of minutes per model, depending on the
complexity. Also note that training the top model over the entire data is usually not necessary as those models
converge often even before a single scan over the entire randomized data. This is in part because we use
simple models and do not care much about the last few digit points in precision, as it has little effect on
indexing performance. Finally, research on improving learning time from the ML community [27, 72] applies
in our context and we expect a lot of future research in this direction.
3.7
Results
We evaluated learned range indexes in regard to their space and speed on several real and synthetic data sets
against other read-optimized index structures.
10


3.7.1
Integer Datasets
As a ﬁrst experiment we compared learned indexes using a 2-stage RMI model and different second-stage
sizes (10k, 50k, 100k, and 200k) with a read-optimized B-Tree with different page sizes on three different
integer data sets. For the data we used 2 real-world datasets, (1) Weblogs and (2) Maps [56], and (3) a
synthetic dataset, Lognormal. The Weblogs dataset contains 200M log entries for every request to a major
university web-site over several years. We use the unique request timestamps as the index keys. This dataset
is almost a worst-case scenario for the learned index as it contains very complex time patterns caused by class
schedules, weekends, holidays, lunch-breaks, department events, semester breaks, etc., which are notoriously
hard to learn. For the maps dataset we indexed the longitude of ≈200M user-maintained features (e.g.,
roads, museums, coffee shops) across the world. Unsurprisingly, the longitude of locations is relatively linear
and has fewer irregularities than the Weblogs dataset. Finally, to test how the index works on heavy-tail
distributions, we generated a synthetic dataset of 190M unique values sampled from a log-normal distribution
with µ = 0 and σ = 2. The values are scaled up to be integers up to 1B. This data is of course highly
non-linear, making the CDF more difﬁcult to learn using neural nets. For all B-Tree experiments we used
64-bit keys and 64-bit payload/value.
As our baseline, we used a production quality B-Tree implementation which is similar to the stx::btree but
with further cache-line optimization, dense pages (i.e., ﬁll factor of 100%), and very competitive performance.
To tune the 2-stage learned indexes we used simple grid-search over neural nets with zero to two hidden
layers and layer-width ranging from 4 to 32 nodes. In general we found that a simple (0 hidden layers) to
semi-complex (2 hidden layers and 8- or 16-wide) models for the ﬁrst stage work the best. For the second
stage, simple, linear models, had the best performance. This is not surprising as for the last mile it is often
not worthwhile to execute complex models, and linear models can be learned optimally.
Learned Index vs B-Tree performance: The main results are shown in Figure 4. Note, that the page
size for B-Trees indicates the number of keys per page not the size in Bytes, which is actually larger. As the
main metrics we show the size in MB, the total look-up time in nano-seconds, and the time to execution the
model (either B-Tree traversal or ML model) also in nano-seconds and as a percentage compared to the total
time in paranthesis. Furthermore, we show the speedup and space savings compared to a B-Tree with page
size of 128 in parenthesis as part of the size and lookup column. We choose a page size of 128 as the ﬁxed
reference point as it provides the best lookup performance for B-Trees (note, that it is always easy to save
space at the expense of lookup performance by simply having no index at all). The color-encoding in the
speedup and size columns indicates how much faster or slower (larger or smaller) the index is against the
reference point.
As can be seen, the learned index dominates the B-Tree index in almost all conﬁgurations by being up
to 1.5 −3× faster while being up to two orders-of-magnitude smaller. Of course, B-Trees can be further
compressed at the cost of CPU-time for decompressing. However, most of these optimizations are orthogonal
and apply equally (if not more) to neural nets. For example, neural nets can be compressed by using 4- or
8-bit integers instead of 32- or 64-bit ﬂoating point values to represent the model parameters (a process
referred to as quantization). This level of compression can unlock additional gains for learned indexes.
Unsurprisingly the second stage size has a signiﬁcant impact on the index size and look-up performance.
Using 10,000 or more models in the second stage is particularly impressive with respect to the analysis in
§2.1, as it demonstrates that our ﬁrst-stage model can make a much larger jump in precision than a single
node in the B-Tree. Finally, we do not report on hybrid models or other search techniques than binary search
for these datasets as they did not provide signiﬁcant beneﬁt.
Learned Index vs Alternative Baselines: In addition to the detailed evaluation of learned indexes
against our read-optimized B-Trees, we also compared learned indexes against other alternative baselines,
including third party implementations, under fair conditions. In the following, we discuss some alternative
baselines and compare them against learned indexes if appropriate:
11


 Lookup Table 
w/ AVX search
FAST
Fixe-Size Btree 
w/ interpol. search
Multivariate 
Learned Index
Time
199 ns
189 ns
280 ns
105 ns
Size
16.3 MB
1024 MB
1.5 MB
1.5 MB
Figure 5: Alternative Baselines
Histogram: B-Trees approximate the CDF of the underlying data distribution. An obvious question is
whether histograms can be used as a CDF model. In principle the answer is yes, but to enable fast data
access, the histogram must be a low-error approximation of the CDF. Typically this requires a large number
of buckets, which makes it expensive to search the histogram itself. This is especially true, if the buckets
have varying bucket boundaries to efﬁciently handle data skew, so that only few buckets are empty or too full.
The obvious solutions to this issues would yield a B-Tree, and histograms are therefore not further discussed.
Lookup-Table: A simple alternative to B-Trees are (hierarchical) lookup-tables. Often lookup-tables
have a ﬁxed size and structure (e.g., 64 slots for which each slot points to another 64 slots, etc.). The advantage
of lookup-tables is that because of their ﬁxed size they can be highly optimized using AVX instructions. We
included a comparison against a 3-stage lookup table, which is constructed by taking every 64th key and
putting it into an array including padding to make it a multiple of 64. Then we repeat that process one more
time over the array without padding, creating two arrays in total. To lookup a key, we use binary search on
the top table followed by an AVX optimized branch-free scan [14] for the second table and the data itself.
This conﬁguration leads to the fastest lookup times compared to alternatives (e.g., using scanning on the top
layer, or binary search on the 2nd array or the data).
FAST: FAST [44] is a highly SIMD optimized data structure. We used the code from [47] for the
comparison. However, it should be noted that FAST always requires to allocate memory in the power of 2 to
use the branch free SIMD instructions, which can lead to signiﬁcantly larger indexes.
Fixed-size B-Tree & interpolation search: Finally, as proposed in a recent blog post [1] we created a
ﬁxed-height B-Tree with interpolation search. The B-Tree height is set, so that the total size of the tree is
1.5MB, similar to our learned model.
Learned indexes without overhead: For our learned index we used a 2-staged RMI index with a multi-
variate linear regression model at the top and simple linear models at the bottom. We used simple automatic
feature engineering for the top model by automatically creating and selecting features in the form of key,
log(key), key2, etc. Multivariate linear regression is an interesting alternative to NN as it is particularly well
suited to ﬁt nonlinear patterns with only a few operations. Furthermore, we implemented the learned index
outside of our benchmarking framework to ensure a fair comparison.
For the comparison we used the Lognormal data with a payload of an eight-byte pointer. The results can
be seen in Figure 5. As can be seen for the dataset under fair conditions, learned indexes provide the best
overall performance while saving signiﬁcant amount of memory. It should be noted, that the FAST index is
big because of the alignment requirement.
While the results are very promising, we by no means claim that learned indexes will always be the best
choice in terms of size or speed. Rather, learned indexes provide a new way to think about indexing and
much more research is needed to fully understand the implications.
3.7.2
String Datasets
We also created a secondary index over 10M non-continuous document-ids of a large web index used as part
of a real product at Google to test how learned indexes perform on strings. The results for the string-based
document-id dataset are shown in Figure 6, which also now includes hybrid models. In addition, we include
our best model in the table, which is a non-hybrid RMI model index with quaternary search, named “Learned
12


Config
Lookup (ns)
Model (ns)
page size:   32
13.11 (4.00x)
1247 (1.03x)
643 (52%)
page size:   64
6.56 (2.00x)
1280 (1.01x)
500 (39%)
page size: 128
3.28 (1.00x)
1288 (1.00x)
377 (29%)
page size: 256
1.64 (0.50x)
1398 (0.92x)
330 (24%)
1 hidden layer
1.22 (0.37x)
1605 (0.80x)
503 (31%)
2 hidden layers
2.26 (0.69x)
1660 (0.78x)
598 (36%)
t=128, 1 hidden layer
1.67 (0.51x)
1397 (0.92x)
472 (34%)
t=128, 2 hidden layers
2.33 (0.71x)
1620 (0.80x)
591 (36%)
t= 64, 1 hidden layer
2.50 (0.76x)
1220 (1.06x)
440 (36%)
t= 64, 2 hidden layers
2.79 (0.85x)
1447 (0.89x)
556 (38%)
Learned QS
1 hidden layer
1.22 (0.37x)
1155 (1.12x)
496 (43%)
Size(MB)
Btree
Learned Index
Hybrid Index
Figure 6: String data: Learned Index vs B-Tree
QS” (bottom of the table). All RMI indexes used 10,000 models on the 2nd stage and for hybrid indexes we
used two thresholds, 128 and 64, as the maximum tolerated absolute error for a model before it is replaced
with a B-Tree.
As can be seen, the speedups for learned indexes over B-Trees for strings are not as prominent. Part
of the reason is the comparably high cost of model execution, a problem that GPU/TPUs would remove.
Furthermore, searching over strings is much more expensive thus higher precision often pays off; the reason
why hybrid indexes, which replace bad performing models through B-Trees, help to improve performance.
Because of the cost of searching, the different search strategies make a bigger difference. For example,
the search time for a NN with 1-hidden layer and biased binary search is 1102ns as shown in Figure 6. In
contrast, our biased quaternary search with the same model only takes 658ns, a signiﬁcant improvement. The
reason why biased search and quaternary search perform better is that they take the model error into account.
4
Point Index
Next to range indexes, Hash-maps for point look-ups play a similarly important role in DBMS. Conceptually
Hash-maps use a hash-function to deterministically map keys to positions inside an array (see Figure 7(a)).
The key challenge for any efﬁcient Hash-map implementation is to prevent too many distinct keys from being
mapped to the same position inside the Hash-map, henceforth referred to as a conﬂict. For example, let’s
assume 100M records and a Hash-map size of 100M. For a hash-function which uniformly randomizes the
keys, the number of expected conﬂicts can be derived similarly to the birthday paradox and in expectation
would be around 33% or 33M slots. For each of these conﬂicts, the Hash-map architecture needs to deal with
this conﬂict. For example, separate chaining Hash-maps would create a linked-list to handle the conﬂict (see
Figure 7(a)). However, many alternatives exist including secondary probing, using buckets with several slots,
up to simultaneously using more than one hash function (e.g., as done by Cuckoo Hashing [57]).
However, regardless of the Hash-map architecture, conﬂicts can have a signiﬁcant impact of the perfor-
mance and/or storage requirement, and machine learned models might provide an alternative to reduce the
number of conﬂicts. While the idea of learning models as a hash-function is not new, existing techniques do
not take advantage of the underlying data distribution. For example, the various perfect hashing techniques
[26] also try to avoid conﬂicts but the data structure used as part of the hash functions grow with the data size;
a property learned models might not have (recall, the example of indexing all keys between 1 and 100M).
To our knowledge it has not been explored if it is possible to learn models which yield more efﬁcient point
indexes.
13


Hash-
Function
Key
Model
Key
(a) Traditional Hash-Map
(b) Learned Hash-Map
Figure 7: Traditional Hash-map vs Learned Hash-map
4.1
The Hash-Model Index
Surprisingly, learning the CDF of the key distribution is one potential way to learn a better hash function.
However, in contrast to range indexes, we do not aim to store the records compactly or in strictly sorted order.
Rather we can scale the CDF by the targeted size M of the Hash-map and use h(K) = F(K) ∗M, with key
K as our hash-function. If the model F perfectly learned the empirical CDF of the keys, no conﬂicts would
exist. Furthermore, the hash-function is orthogonal to the actual Hash-map architecture and can be combined
with separate chaining or any other Hash-map type.
For the model, we can again leverage the recursive model architecture from the previous section. Obvi-
ously, like before, there exists a trade-off between the size of the index and performance, which is inﬂuenced
by the model and dataset.
Note, that how inserts, look-ups, and conﬂicts are handled is dependent on the Hash-map architecture.
As a result, the beneﬁts learned hash functions provide over traditional hash functions, which map keys to a
uniformly distributed space depend on two key factors: (1) How accurately the model represents the observed
CDF. For example, if the data is generated by a uniform distribution, a simple linear model will be able to
learn the general data distribution, but the resulting hash function will not be better than any sufﬁciently
randomized hash function. (2) Hash map architecture: depending on the architecture, implementation details,
the payload (i.e., value), the conﬂict resolution policy, as well as how much more memory (i.e., slots) will
or can be allocated, signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the performance. For example, for small keys and small or no
values, traditional hash functions with Cuckoo hashing will probably work well, whereas larger payloads or
distributed hash maps might beneﬁt more from avoiding conﬂicts, and thus from learned hash functions.
4.2
Results
We evaluated the conﬂict rate of learned hash functions over the three integer data sets from the previous
section. As our model hash-functions we used the 2-stage RMI models from the previous section with 100k
models on the 2nd stage and without any hidden layers. As the baseline we used a simple MurmurHash3-like
hash-function and compared the number of conﬂicts for a table with the same number of slots as records.
As can be seen in Figure 8, the learned models can reduce the number of conﬂicts by up to 77% over
our datasets by learning the empirical CDF at a reasonable cost; the execution time is the same as the model
execution time in Figure 4, around 25-40ns.
How beneﬁcial the reduction of conﬂicts is given the model execution time depends on the Hash-map
architecture, payload, and many other factors. For example, our experiments (see Appendix B) show that
for a separate chaining Hash-map architecture with 20 Byte records learned hash functions can reduce the
14


% Conflicts Hash Map
% Conflicts Model
Reduction
Map Data
35.3%
07.9%
77.5%
Web Data
35.3%
24.7%
30.0%
Log Normal
35.4%
25.9%
26.7%
Figure 8: Reduction of Conﬂicts
wasted amount of storage by up to 80% at an increase of only 13ns in latency compared to random hashing.
The reason why it only increases the latency by 13ns and not 40ns is, that often fewer conﬂicts also yield to
fewer cache misses, and thus better performance. On the other hand, for very small payloads Cuckoo-hashing
with standard hash-maps probably remains the best choice. However, as we show in Appendix C, for larger
payloads a chained-hashmap with learned hash function can be faster than cuckoo-hashing and/or traditional
randomized hashing. Finally, we see the biggest potential for distributed settings. For example, NAM-DB [74]
employs a hash function to look-up data on remote machines using RDMA. Because of the extremely high
cost for every conﬂict (i.e., every conﬂict requires an additional RDMA request which is in the order of
micro-seconds), the model execution time is negligible and even small reductions in the conﬂict rate can
signiﬁcantly improve the overall performance. To conclude, learned hash functions are independent of the
used Hash-map architecture and depending on the Hash-map architecture their complexity may or may not
pay off.
5
Existence Index
The last common index type of DBMS are existence indexes, most importantly Bloom ﬁlters, a space efﬁcient
probabilistic data structure to test whether an element is a member of a set. They are commonly used to
determine if a key exists on cold storage. For example, Bigtable uses them to determine if a key is contained
in an SSTable [23].
Internally, Bloom ﬁlters use a bit array of size m and k hash functions, which each map a key to one of
the m array positions (see Figure9(a)). To add an element to the set, a key is fed to the k hash-functions and
the bits of the returned positions are set to 1. To test if a key is a member of the set, the key is again fed into
the k hash functions to receive k array positions. If any of the bits at those k positions is 0, the key is not a
member of a set. In other words, a Bloom ﬁlter does guarantee that there exists no false negatives, but has
potential false positives.
While Bloom ﬁlters are highly space-efﬁcient, they can still occupy a signiﬁcant amount of memory. For
example for one billion records roughly ≈1.76 Gigabytes are needed. For a FPR of 0.01% we would require
≈2.23 Gigabytes. There have been several attempts to improve the efﬁciency of Bloom ﬁlters [52], but the
general observation remains.
Yet, if there is some structure to determine what is inside versus outside the set, which can be learned, it
might be possible to construct more efﬁcient representations. Interestingly, for existence indexes for database
systems, the latency and space requirements are usually quite different than what we saw before. Given the
high latency to access cold storage (e.g., disk or even band), we can afford more complex models while the
main objective is to minimize the space for the index and the number of false positives. We outline two
potential ways to build existence indexes using lea
5.1
Learned Bloom ﬁlters
While both range and point indexes learn the distribution of keys, existence indexes need to learn a function
that separates keys from everything else. Stated differently, a good hash function for a point index is one with
few collisions among keys, whereas a good hash function for a Bloom ﬁlter would be one that has lots of
15


h1
h2
h3
h1
h2
h3
Model
Yes
Bloom 
ﬁlter
No
Key
Yes
 key1                      key2 
key3
key1
key2
key3
Model
Model
Model
h1
h2
h3
(a) Traditional Bloom-Filter Insertion
(b) Learned Bloom-Filter Insertion
(c) Bloom ﬁlters as a classiﬁcation problem
Figure 9: Bloom ﬁlters Architectures
collisions among keys and lots of collisions among non-keys, but few collisions of keys and non-keys. We
consider below how to learn such a function f and how to incorporate it into an existence index.
While traditional Bloom ﬁlters guarantee a false negative rate (FNR) of zero and a speciﬁc false positive
rate (FPR) for any set of queries chosen a-priori [22], we follow the notion that we want to provide a speciﬁc
FPR for realistic queries in particular while maintaining a FNR of zero. That is, we measure the FPR over a
heldout dataset of queries, as is common in evaluating ML systems [30]. While these deﬁnitions differ, we
believe the assumption that we can observe the distribution of queries, e.g., from historical logs, holds in
many applications, especially within databases5.
Traditionally, existence indexes make no use of the distribution of keys nor how they differ from non-keys,
but learned Bloom ﬁlters can. For example, if our database included all integers x for 0 ≤x < n, the
existence index could be computed in constant time and with almost no memory footprint by just computing
f(x) ≡1[0 ≤x < n].
In considering the data distribution for ML purposes, we must consider a dataset of non-keys. In this
work, we consider the case where non-keys come from observable historical queries and we assume that
future queries come from the same distribution as historical queries. When this assumption does not hold,
one could use randomly generated keys, non-keys generated by a machine learning model [34], importance
weighting to directly address covariate shift [18], or adversarial training for robustness [65]; we leave this as
future work. We denote the set of keys by K and the set of non-keys by U.
5.1.1
Bloom ﬁlters as a Classiﬁcation Problem
One way to frame the existence index is as a binary probabilistic classiﬁcation task. That is, we want to learn
a model f that can predict if a query x is a key or non-key. For example, for strings we can train a recurrent
neural network (RNN) or convolutional neural network (CNN) [64, 37] with D = {(xi, yi = 1)|xi ∈
K} ∪{(xi, yi = 0)|xi ∈U}. Because this is a binary classiﬁcation task, our neural network has a sigmoid
activation to produce a probability and is trained to minimize the log loss: L = P
(x,y)∈D y log f(x) + (1 −
y) log(1 −f(x)).
The output of f(x) can be interpreted as the probability that x is a key in our database. Thus, we can
turn the model into an existence index by choosing a threshold τ above which we will assume that the key
exists in our database. Unlike Bloom ﬁlters, our model will likely have a non-zero FPR and FNR; in fact, as
the FPR goes down, the FNR will go up. In order to preserve the no false negatives constraint of existence
indexes, we create an overﬂow Bloom ﬁlter. That is, we consider K−
τ = {x ∈K|f(x) < τ} to be the set of
false negatives from f and create a Bloom ﬁlter for this subset of keys. We can then run our existence index
as in Figure 9(c): if f(x) ≥τ, the key is believed to exist; otherwise, check the overﬂow Bloom ﬁlter.
One question is how to set τ so that our learned Bloom ﬁlter has the desired FPR p∗. We denote
the FPR of our model by FPRτ ≡
P
x∈˜
U 1(f(x)>τ)
| ˜U|
where ˜U is a held-out set of non-keys. We denote
the FPR of our overﬂow Bloom ﬁlter by FPRB. The overall FPR of our system therefore is FPRO =
5We would like to thank Michael Mitzenmacher for valuable conversations in articulating the relationship between these
deﬁnitions as well as improving the overall chapter through his insightful comments.
16


FPRτ + (1 −FPRτ)FPRB [53] 6. For simplicity, we set FPRτ = FPRB = p∗
2 so that FPRO ≤p∗. We
tune τ to achieve this FPR on ˜U.
This setup is effective in that the learned model can be fairly small relative to the size of the data. Further,
because Bloom ﬁlters scale with the size of key set, the overﬂow Bloom ﬁlter will scale with the FNR. We
will see experimentally that this combination is effective in decreasing the memory footprint of the existence
index. Finally, the learned model computation can beneﬁt from machine learning accelerators, whereas
traditional Bloom ﬁlters tend to be heavily dependent on the random access latency of the memory system.
5.1.2
Bloom ﬁlters with Model-Hashes
An alternative approach to building existence indexes is to learn a hash function with the goal to maximize
collisions among keys and among non-keys while minimizing collisions of keys and non-keys. Interestingly,
we can use the same probabilistic classiﬁcation model as before to achieve that. That is, we can create a
hash function d, which maps f to a bit array of size m by scaling its output as d = ⌊f(x) ∗m⌋As such, we
can use d as a hash function just like any other in a Bloom ﬁlter. This has the advantage of f being trained
to map most keys to the higher range of bit positions and non-keys to the lower range of bit positions (see
Figure9(b)). A more detailed explanation of the approach is given in Appendix E.
5.2
Results
In order to test this idea experimentally, we explore the application of an existence index for keeping track of
blacklisted phishing URLs. We consider data from Google’s transparency report as our set of keys to keep
track of. This dataset consists of 1.7M unique URLs. We use a negative set that is a mixture of random (valid)
URLs and whitelisted URLs that could be mistaken for phishing pages. We split our negative set randomly
into train, validation and test sets. We train a character-level RNN (GRU [24], in particular) to predict which
set a URL belongs to; we set τ based on the validation set and also report the FPR on the test set.
A normal Bloom ﬁlter with a desired 1% FPR requires 2.04MB. We consider a 16-dimensional GRU
with a 32-dimensional embedding for each character; this model is 0.0259MB. When building a comparable
learned index, we set τ for 0.5% FPR on the validation set; this gives a FNR of 55%. (The FPR on the test set
is 0.4976%, validating the chosen threshold.) As described above, the size of our Bloom ﬁlter scales with the
FNR. Thus, we ﬁnd that our model plus the spillover Bloom ﬁlter uses 1.31MB, a 36% reduction in size. If
we want to enforce an overall FPR of 0.1%, we have a FNR of 76%, which brings the total Bloom ﬁlter size
down from 3.06MB to 2.59MB, a 15% reduction in memory. We observe this general relationship in Figure
10. Interestingly, we see how different size models balance the accuracy vs. memory trade-off differently.
We consider brieﬂy the case where there is covariate shift in our query distribution that we have not
addressed in the model. When using validation and test sets with only random URLs we ﬁnd that we can save
60% over a Bloom ﬁlter with a FPR of 1%. When using validation and test sets with only the whitelisted
URLs we ﬁnd that we can save 21% over a Bloom ﬁlter with a FPR of 1%. Ultimately, the choice of negative
set is application speciﬁc and covariate shift could be more directly addressed, but these experiments are
intended to give intuition for how the approach adapts to different situations.
Clearly, the more accurate our model is, the better the savings in Bloom ﬁlter size. One interesting
property of this is that there is no reason that our model needs to use the same features as the Bloom ﬁlter.
For example, signiﬁcant research has worked on using ML to predict if a webpage is a phishing page [10, 15].
Additional features like WHOIS data or IP information could be incorporated in the model, improving
accuracy, decreasing Bloom ﬁlter size, and keeping the property of no false negatives.
Further, we give additional results following the approach in Section 5.1.2 in Appendix E.
6We again thank Michael Mitzenmacher for identifying this relation when reviewing our paper.
17


 0                   0.5                  1.0                  1.5                   2
1
2
3
4
5
Memory Footprint (Megabytes)
BloomFilter 
W=128,E=32
W=32,E=32
W=16,E=32 
0
False Positive Rate (%)
Figure 10: Learned Bloom ﬁlter improves memory footprint at a wide range of FPRs. (Here W is the RNN
width and E is the embedding size for each character.)
6
Related Work
The idea of learned indexes builds upon a wide range of research in machine learning and indexing techniques.
In the following, we highlight the most important related areas.
B-Trees and variants: Over the last decades a variety of different index structures have been proposed
[36], such as B+-trees [17] for disk based systems and T-trees [46] or balanced/red-black trees [16, 20] for
in-memory systems. As the original main-memory trees had poor cache behavior, several cache conscious
B+-tree variants were proposed, such as the CSB+-tree [58]. Similarly, there has been work on making use
of SIMD instructions such as FAST [44] or even taking advantage of GPUs [44, 61, 43]. Moreover, many
of these (in-memory) indexes are able to reduce their storage-needs by using offsets rather than pointers
between nodes. There exists also a vast array of research on index structures for text, such as tries/radix-trees
[19, 45, 31], or other exotic index structures, which combine ideas from B-Trees and tries [48].
However, all of these approaches are orthogonal to the idea of learned indexes as none of them learn from
the data distribution to achieve a more compact index representation or performance gains. At the same time,
like with our hybrid indexes, it might be possible to more tightly integrate the existing hardware-conscious
index strategies with learned models for further performance gains.
Since B+-trees consume signiﬁcant memory, there has also been a lot of work in compressing indexes,
such as preﬁx/sufﬁx truncation, dictionary compression, key normalization [36, 33, 55], or hybrid hot/cold
indexes [75]. However, we presented a radical different way to compress indexes, which—dependent on
the data distribution—is able to achieve orders-of-magnitude smaller indexes and faster look-up times and
potentially even changes the storage complexity class (e.g., O(n) to O(1) ). Interestingly though, some of
the existing compression techniques are complimentary to our approach and could help to further improve
the efﬁciency. For example, dictionary compression can be seen as a form of embedding (i.e., representing a
string as a unique integer).
Probably most related to this paper are A-Trees [32], BF-Trees [13], and B-Tree interpolation search [35].
BF-Trees uses a B+-tree to store information about a region of the dataset, but leaf nodes are Bloom ﬁlters
and do not approximate the CDF. In contrast, A-Trees use piece-wise linear functions to reduce the number of
leaf-nodes in a B-Tree, and [35] proposes to use interpolation search within a B-Tree page. However, learned
18


indexes go much further and propose to replace the entire index structure using learned models.
Finally, sparse indexes like Hippo [73], Block Range Indexes [63], and Small Materialized Aggregates
(SMAs) [54] all store information about value ranges but again do not take advantage of the underlying
properties of the data distribution.
Learning Hash Functions for ANN Indexes: There has been a lot of research on learning hash functions
[49, 68, 67, 59]. Most notably, there has been work on learning locality-sensitive hash (LSH) functions to
build Approximate Nearest Neighborhood (ANN) indexes. For example, [66, 68, 40] explore the use of
neural networks as a hash function, whereas [69] even tries to preserve the order of the multi-dimensional
input space. However, the general goal of LSH is to group similar items into buckets to support nearest
neighborhood queries, usually involving learning approximate similarity measures in high-dimensional input
space using some variant of hamming distances. There is no direct way to adapt previous approaches to learn
the fundamental data structures we consider, and it is not clear whether they can be adapted.
Perfect Hashing: Perfect hashing [26] is very related to our use of models for Hash-maps. Like our CDF
models, perfect hashing tries to avoid conﬂicts. However, in all approaches of which we are aware, learning
techniques have not been considered, and the size of the function grows with the size of the data. In contrast,
learned hash functions can be independent of the size. For example, a linear model for mapping every other
integer between 0 and 200M would not create any conﬂicts and is independent of the size of the data. In
addition, perfect hashing is also not useful for B-Trees or Bloom ﬁlters.
Bloom ﬁlters: Finally, our existence indexes directly builds upon the existing work in Bloom ﬁlters
[29, 11]. Yet again our work takes a different perspective on the problem by proposing a Bloom ﬁlter
enhanced classiﬁcation model or using models as special hash functions with a very different optimization
goal than the hash-models we created for Hash-maps.
Succinct Data Structures: There exists an interesting connection between learned indexes and succinct
data structures, especially rank-select dictionaries such as wavelet trees [39, 38]. However, many succinct
data structures focus on H0 entropy (i.e., the number of bits that are necessary to encode each element in the
index), whereas learned indexes try to learn the underlying data distribution to predict the position of each
element. Thus, learned indexes might achieve a higher compression rate than H0 entropy potentially at the
cost of slower operations. Furthermore, succinct data structures normally have to be carefully constructed for
each use case, whereas learned indexes “automate” this process through machine learning. Yet, succinct data
structures might provide a framework to further study learned indexes.
Modeling CDFs: Our models for both range and point indexes are closely tied to models of the CDF.
Estimating the CDF is non-trivial and has been studied in the machine learning community [50] with a few
applications such as ranking [42]. How to most effectively model the CDF is still an open question worth
further investigation.
Mixture of Experts: Our RMI architecture follows a long line of research on building experts for subsets
of the data [51]. With the growth of neural networks, this has become more common and demonstrated
increased usefulness [62]. As we see in our setting, it nicely lets us to decouple model size and model
computation, enabling more complex models that are not more expensive to execute.
7
Conclusion and Future Work
We have shown that learned indexes can provide signiﬁcant beneﬁts by utilizing the distribution of data being
indexed. This opens the door to many interesting research questions.
Other ML Models: While our focus was on linear models and neural nets with mixture of experts, there
exist many other ML model types and ways to combine them with traditional data structures, which are worth
exploring.
19


Multi-Dimensional Indexes: Arguably the most exciting research direction for the idea of learned
indexes is to extend them to multi-dimensional indexes. Models, especially NNs, are extremely good at
capturing complex high-dimensional relationships. Ideally, this model would be able to estimate the position
of all records ﬁltered by any combination of attributes.
Beyond Indexing: Learned Algorithms Maybe surprisingly, a CDF model has also the potential to
speed-up sorting and joins, not just indexes. For instance, the basic idea to speed-up sorting is to use an
existing CDF model F to put the records roughly in sorted order and then correct the nearly perfectly sorted
data, for example, with insertion sort.
GPU/TPUs Finally, as mentioned several times throughout this paper, GPU/TPUs will make the idea
of learned indexes even more valuable. At the same time, GPU/TPUs also have their own challenges, most
importantly the high invocation latency. While it is reasonable to assume that probably all learned indexes
will ﬁt on the GPU/TPU because of the exceptional compression ratio as shown before, it still requires 2-3
micro-seconds to invoke any operation on them. At the same time, the integration of machine learning
accelerators with the CPU is getting better [6, 4] and with techniques like batching requests the cost of
invocation can be amortized, so that we do not believe the invocation latency is a real obstacle.
In summary, we have demonstrated that machine learned models have the potential to provide
signiﬁcant beneﬁts over state-of-the-art indexes, and we believe this is a fruitful direction for future
research.
Acknowledgements: We would like to thank Michael Mitzenmacher, Chris Olston, Jonathan Bischof and many others
at Google for their helpful feedback during the preparation of this paper.
20


References
[1] Database architects blog: The case for b-tree index structures. http://databasearchitects.
blogspot.de/2017/12/the-case-for-b-tree-index-structures.html.
[2] Google’s sparsehash documentation.
https://github.com/sparsehash/sparsehash/
blob/master/src/sparsehash/sparse_hash_map.
[3] An
in-depth
look
at
google’s
ﬁrst
tensor
processing
unit
(tpu).
https://cloud.google.com/blog/big-data/2017/05/
an-in-depth-look-at-googles-first-tensor-processing-unit-tpu.
[4] Intel
Xeon
Phi.
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/products/
processors/xeon-phi/xeon-phi-processors.html.
[5] Moore Law is Dead but GPU will get 1000X faster by 2025. https://www.nextbigfuture.
com/2017/06/moore-law-is-dead-but-gpu-will-get-1000x-faster-by-2025.
html.
[6] NVIDIA NVLink High-Speed Interconnect.
http://www.nvidia.com/object/nvlink.
html.
[7] Stanford DAWN cuckoo hashing.
https://github.com/stanford-futuredata/
index-baselines.
[8] Trying to speed up binary search. http://databasearchitects.blogspot.com/2015/
09/trying-to-speed-up-binary-search.html.
[9] M. Abadi, P. Barham, J. Chen, Z. Chen, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin, S. Ghemawat, G. Irving, M. Isard,
et al. Tensorﬂow: A system for large-scale machine learning. In OSDI, volume 16, pages 265–283,
2016.
[10] S. Abu-Nimeh, D. Nappa, X. Wang, and S. Nair. A comparison of machine learning techniques for
phishing detection. In eCrime, pages 60–69, 2007.
[11] K. Alexiou, D. Kossmann, and P.-A. Larson. Adaptive range ﬁlters for cold data: Avoiding trips to
siberia. Proc. VLDB Endow., 6(14):1714–1725, Sept. 2013.
[12] M. Armbrust, A. Fox, D. A. Patterson, N. Lanham, B. Trushkowsky, J. Trutna, and H. Oh. SCADS:
scale-independent storage for social computing applications. In CIDR, 2009.
[13] M. Athanassoulis and A. Ailamaki. BF-tree: Approximate Tree Indexing. In VLDB, pages 1881–1892,
2014.
[14] Performance comparison:
linear search vs binary search.
https://dirtyhandscoding.
wordpress.com/2017/08/25/performance-comparison-linear-search-vs-binary-search/
[15] R. B. Basnet, S. Mukkamala, and A. H. Sung. Detection of phishing attacks: A machine learning
approach. Soft Computing Applications in Industry, 226:373–383, 2008.
[16] R. Bayer. Symmetric binary b-trees: Data structure and maintenance algorithms. Acta Inf., 1(4):290–306,
Dec. 1972.
21


[17] R. Bayer and E. McCreight. Organization and maintenance of large ordered indices. In SIGFIDET
(Now SIGMOD), pages 107–141, 1970.
[18] S. Bickel, M. Br¨uckner, and T. Scheffer. Discriminative learning under covariate shift. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 10(Sep):2137–2155, 2009.
[19] M. B¨ohm, B. Schlegel, P. B. Volk, U. Fischer, D. Habich, and W. Lehner. Efﬁcient in-memory indexing
with generalized preﬁx trees. In BTW, pages 227–246, 2011.
[20] J. Boyar and K. S. Larsen. Efﬁcient rebalancing of chromatic search trees. Journal of Computer and
System Sciences, 49(3):667 – 682, 1994. 30th IEEE Conference on Foundations of Computer Science.
[21] M. Brantner, D. Florescu, D. A. Graf, D. Kossmann, and T. Kraska. Building a database on S3. In
SIGMOD, pages 251–264, 2008.
[22] A. Broder and M. Mitzenmacher. Network applications of bloom ﬁlters: A survey. Internet mathematics,
1(4):485–509, 2004.
[23] F. Chang, J. Dean, S. Ghemawat, W. C. Hsieh, D. A. Wallach, M. Burrows, T. Chandra, A. Fikes, and
R. Gruber. Bigtable: A distributed storage system for structured data (awarded best paper!). In OSDI,
pages 205–218, 2006.
[24] K. Cho, B. van Merrienboer, C¸ . G¨ulc¸ehre, D. Bahdanau, F. Bougares, H. Schwenk, and Y. Bengio.
Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation. In
EMNLP, pages 1724–1734, 2014.
[25] A. Crotty, A. Galakatos, K. Dursun, T. Kraska, C. Binnig, U. C¸ etintemel, and S. Zdonik. An architecture
for compiling udf-centric workﬂows. PVLDB, 8(12):1466–1477, 2015.
[26] M. Dietzfelbinger, A. Karlin, K. Mehlhorn, F. Meyer auF der Heide, H. Rohnert, and R. E. Tarjan.
Dynamic perfect hashing: Upper and lower bounds. SIAM Journal on Computing, 23(4):738–761,
1994.
[27] J. Duchi, E. Hazan, and Y. Singer. Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning and stochastic
optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12(Jul):2121–2159, 2011.
[28] A. Dvoretzky, J. Kiefer, and J. Wolfowitz. Asymptotic minimax character of the sample distribution
function and of the classical multinomial estimator. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, pages
642–669, 1956.
[29] B. Fan, D. G. Andersen, M. Kaminsky, and M. D. Mitzenmacher. Cuckoo ﬁlter: Practically better than
bloom. In CoNEXT, pages 75–88, 2014.
[30] T. Fawcett. An introduction to roc analysis. Pattern recognition letters, 27(8):861–874, 2006.
[31] E. Fredkin. Trie memory. Commun. ACM, 3(9):490–499, Sept. 1960.
[32] A. Galakatos, M. Markovitch, C. Binnig, R. Fonseca, and T. Kraska. A-tree: A bounded approximate
index structure. CoRR, abs/1801.10207, 2018.
[33] J. Goldstein, R. Ramakrishnan, and U. Shaft. Compressing Relations and Indexes. In ICDE, pages
370–379, 1998.
22


[34] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, and
Y. Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In NIPS, pages 2672–2680, 2014.
[35] G. Graefe. B-tree indexes, interpolation search, and skew. In DaMoN, 2006.
[36] G. Graefe and P. A. Larson. B-tree indexes and CPU caches. In ICDE, pages 349–358, 2001.
[37] A. Graves. Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.0850,
2013.
[38] R. Grossi, A. Gupta, and J. S. Vitter. High-order entropy-compressed text indexes. In SODA, pages
841–850. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2003.
[39] R. Grossi and G. Ottaviano. The wavelet trie: Maintaining an indexed sequence of strings in compressed
space. In PODS, pages 203–214, 2012.
[40] J. Guo and J. Li. CNN based hashing for image retrieval. CoRR, abs/1509.01354, 2015.
[41] M. Gupta, A. Cotter, J. Pfeifer, K. Voevodski, K. Canini, A. Mangylov, W. Moczydlowski, and
A. Van Esbroeck. Monotonic calibrated interpolated look-up tables. The Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 17(1):3790–3836, 2016.
[42] J. C. Huang and B. J. Frey. Cumulative distribution networks and the derivative-sum-product algorithm:
Models and inference for cumulative distribution functions on graphs. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 12:301–348,
Feb. 2011.
[43] K. Kaczmarski. B + -Tree Optimized for GPGPU. 2012.
[44] C. Kim, J. Chhugani, N. Satish, E. Sedlar, A. D. Nguyen, T. Kaldewey, V. W. Lee, S. A. Brandt, and
P. Dubey. Fast: Fast architecture sensitive tree search on modern cpus and gpus. In SIGMOD, pages
339–350, 2010.
[45] T. Kissinger, B. Schlegel, D. Habich, and W. Lehner. Kiss-tree: Smart latch-free in-memory indexing
on modern architectures. In DaMoN, pages 16–23, 2012.
[46] T. J. Lehman and M. J. Carey. A study of index structures for main memory database management
systems. In VLDB, pages 294–303, 1986.
[47] V. Leis. FAST source. http://www-db.in.tum.de/leis/index/fast.cpp.
[48] V. Leis, A. Kemper, and T. Neumann. The adaptive radix tree: Artful indexing for main-memory
databases. In ICDE, pages 38–49, 2013.
[49] W. Litwin. Readings in database systems. chapter Linear Hashing: A New Tool for File and Table
Addressing., pages 570–581. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1988.
[50] M. Magdon-Ismail and A. F. Atiya. Neural networks for density estimation. In M. J. Kearns, S. A.
Solla, and D. A. Cohn, editors, NIPS, pages 522–528. MIT Press, 1999.
[51] D. J. Miller and H. S. Uyar. A mixture of experts classiﬁer with learning based on both labelled and
unlabelled data. In NIPS, pages 571–577, 1996.
[52] M. Mitzenmacher. Compressed bloom ﬁlters. In PODC, pages 144–150, 2001.
23


[53] M. Mitzenmacher.
A model for learned bloom ﬁlters and related structures.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.00884, 2018.
[54] G. Moerkotte. Small Materialized Aggregates: A Light Weight Index Structure for Data Warehousing.
In VLDB, pages 476–487, 1998.
[55] T. Neumann and G. Weikum. RDF-3X: A RISC-style Engine for RDF. Proc. VLDB Endow., pages
647–659, 2008.
[56] OpenStreetMap database
c⃝OpenStreetMap contributors.
https://aws.amazon.com/
public-datasets/osm.
[57] R. Pagh and F. F. Rodler. Cuckoo hashing. Journal of Algorithms, 51(2):122–144, 2004.
[58] J. Rao and K. A. Ross. Making b+- trees cache conscious in main memory. In SIGMOD, pages 475–486,
2000.
[59] S. Richter, V. Alvarez, and J. Dittrich. A seven-dimensional analysis of hashing methods and its
implications on query processing. Proc. VLDB Endow., 9(3):96–107, Nov. 2015.
[60] D. G. Severance and G. M. Lohman. Differential ﬁles: Their application to the maintenance of large
data bases. In SIGMOD, pages 43–43, 1976.
[61] A. Shahvarani and H.-A. Jacobsen. A hybrid b+-tree as solution for in-memory indexing on cpu-gpu
heterogeneous computing platforms. In SIGMOD, pages 1523–1538, 2016.
[62] N. Shazeer, A. Mirhoseini, K. Maziarz, A. Davis, Q. Le, G. Hinton, and J. Dean. Outrageously large
neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06538, 2017.
[63] M. Stonebraker and L. A. Rowe. The Design of POSTGRES. In SIGMOD, pages 340–355, 1986.
[64] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V. Le. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks. In NIPS,
pages 3104–3112, 2014.
[65] F. Tram`er, A. Kurakin, N. Papernot, D. Boneh, and P. McDaniel. Ensemble adversarial training: Attacks
and defenses. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.07204, 2017.
[66] M. Turcanik and M. Javurek. Hash function generation by neural network. In NTSP, pages 1–5, Oct
2016.
[67] J. Wang, W. Liu, S. Kumar, and S. F. Chang. Learning to hash for indexing big data;a survey. Proceedings
of the IEEE, 104(1):34–57, Jan 2016.
[68] J. Wang, H. T. Shen, J. Song, and J. Ji. Hashing for similarity search: A survey. CoRR, abs/1408.2927,
2014.
[69] J. Wang, J. Wang, N. Yu, and S. Li. Order preserving hashing for approximate nearest neighbor search.
In MM, pages 133–142, 2013.
[70] Y. Wu, M. Schuster, Z. Chen, Q. V. Le, M. Norouzi, W. Macherey, M. Krikun, Y. Cao, Q. Gao,
K. Macherey, et al. Google’s neural machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and
machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08144, 2016.
[71] S. You, D. Ding, K. Canini, J. Pfeifer, and M. Gupta. Deep lattice networks and partial monotonic
functions. In NIPS, pages 2985–2993, 2017.
24


[72] Y. You, Z. Zhang, C. Hsieh, J. Demmel, and K. Keutzer. Imagenet training in minutes. CoRR,
abs/1709.05011, 2017.
[73] J. Yu and M. Sarwat. Two Birds, One Stone: A Fast, Yet Lightweight, Indexing Scheme for Modern
Database Systems. In VLDB, pages 385–396, 2016.
[74] E. Zamanian, C. Binnig, T. Kraska, and T. Harris. The end of a myth: Distributed transaction can scale.
PVLDB, 10(6):685–696, 2017.
[75] H. Zhang, D. G. Andersen, A. Pavlo, M. Kaminsky, L. Ma, and R. Shen. Reducing the storage overhead
of main-memory OLTP databases with hybrid indexes. In SIGMOD, pages 1567–1581, 2016.
25


A
Theoretical Analysis of Scaling Learned Range Indexes
One advantage of framing learned range indexes as modeling the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of
the data is that we can build on the long research literature on modeling the CDF. Signiﬁcant research has
studied the relationship between a theoretical CDF F(x) and the empirical CDF of data sampled from F(x).
We consider the case where we have sampled i.i.d. N datapoints, Y, from some distribution, and we will use
ˆFN(x) to denote the empirical cumulative distribution function:
ˆFN(x) =
P
y∈Y 1y≤x
N
.
(2)
One theoretical question about learned indexes is: how well do they scale with the size of the data N? In
our setting, we learn a model F(x) to approximate the distribution of our data ˆFN(x). Here, we assume we
know the distribution F(x) that generated the data and analyze the error inherent in the data being sampled
from that distribution7. That is, we consider the error between the distribution of data ˆFN(x) and our model
of the distribution F(x). Because ˆFN(x) is a binomial random variable with mean F(x), we ﬁnd that the
expected squared error between our data and our model is given by
E

F(x) −ˆFN(x)
2
= F(x)(1 −F(x))
N
.
(3)
In our application the look-up time scales with the average error in the number of positions in the sorted
data; that is, we are concerned with the error between our model NF(x) and the key position N ˆFN(x). With
some minor manipulation of Eq. (3), we ﬁnd that the average error in the predicted positions grows at a rate
of O(
√
N). Note that this sub-linear scaling in error for a constant-sized model is an improvement over the
linear scaling achieved by a constant-sized B-Tree. This provides preliminary understanding of the scalability
of our approach and demonstrates how framing indexing as learning the CDF lends itself well to theoretical
analysis.
B
Separated Chaining Hash-map
We evaluated the potential of learned hash functions using a separate chaining Hash-map; records are stored
directly within an array and only in the case of a conﬂict is the record attached to the linked-list. That is
without a conﬂict there is at most one cache miss. Only in the case that several keys map to the same position,
additional cache-misses might occur. We choose that design as it leads to the best look-up performance even
for larger payloads. For example, we also tested a commercial-grade dense Hash-map with a bucket-based
in-place overﬂow (i.e., the Hash-map is divided into buckets to minimize overhead and uses in-place overﬂow
if a bucket is full [2]). While it is possible to achieve a lower footprint using this technique, we found that it
is also twice as slow as the separate chaining approach. Furthermore, at 80% or more memory utilization the
dense Hash-maps degrade further in performance. Of course many further (orthogonal) optimizations are
possible and by no means do we claim that this is the most memory or CPU efﬁcient implementation of a
Hash-map. Rather we aim to demonstrate the general potential of learned hash functions.
As the baseline for this experiment we used our Hash-map implementation with a MurmurHash3-like
hash-function. As the data we used the three integer datasets from Section 3.7 and as the model-based
Hash-map the 2-stage RMI model with 100k models on the 2nd stage and no hidden layers from the same
section. For all experiments we varied the number of available slots from 75% to 125% of the data. That
is, with 75% there are 25% less slots in the Hash-map than data records. Forcing less slots than the data
7Learning F(x) can improve or worsen the error, but we take this as a reasonable assumption for some applications, such as data
keyed by a random hash.
26


Dataset
Slots
Hash Type
Time (ns)
Empty Slots
Space
Model Hash
67
0.18GB
0.21x
Random Has
52
0.84GB
Model Hash
53
0.35GB
0.22x
Random Has
48
1.58GB
Model Hash
64
1.47GB
0.60x
Random Has
49
2.43GB
Model Hash
78
0.64GB
0.77x
Random Has
53
0.83GB
Model Hash
63
1.09GB
0.70x
Random Has
50
1.56GB
Model Hash
77
2.20GB
0.91x
Random Has
50
2.41GB
Model Hash
79
0.63GB
0.79x
Random Has
52
0.80GB
Model Hash
66
1.10GB
0.73x
Random Has
46
1.50GB
Model Hash
77
2.16GB
0.94x
Random Has
46
2.31GB
Log Normal
75%
100%
125%
75%
100%
125%
75%
100%
125%
Map
Web
Figure 11: Model vs Random Hash-map
size, minimizes the empty slots within the Hash-map at the expense of longer linked lists. However, for
Hash-maps we store the full records, which consist of a 64bit key, 64bit payload, and a 32bit meta-data ﬁeld
for delete ﬂags, version nb, etc. (so a record has a ﬁxed length of 20 Bytes); note that our chained hash-map
adds another 32bit pointer, making it a 24Byte slot.
The results are shown in Figure 11, listing the average look-up time, the number of empty slots in GB and
the space improvement as a factor of using a randomized hash function. Note, that in contrast to the B-Tree
experiments, we do include the data size. The main reason is that in order to enable 1 cache-miss look-ups,
the data itself has to be included in the Hash-map, whereas in the previous section we only counted the extra
index overhead excluding the sorted array itself.
As can be seen in Figure 11, the index with the model hash function overall has similar performance
while utilizing the memory better. For example, for the map dataset the model hash function only “wastes”
0.18GB in slots, an almost 80% reduction compared to using a random hash function. Obviously, the moment
we increase the Hash-map in size to have 25% more slots, the savings are not as large, as the Hash-map is
also able to better spread out the keys. Surprisingly if we decrease the space to 75% of the number of keys,
the learned Hash-map still has an advantage because of the still prevalent birthday paradox.
C
Hash-Map Comparison Against Alternative Baselines
In addition to the separate chaining Hash-map architecture, we also compared learned point indexes against
four alternative Hash-map architectures and conﬁgurations:
AVX Cuckoo Hash-map: We used an AVX optimized Cuckoo Hash-map from [7].
Commercial Cuckoo Hash-map: The implementation of [7] is highly tuned, but does not handle all
corner cases. We therefore also compared against a commercially used Cuckoo Hash-map.
In-place chained Hash-map with learned hash functions: One signiﬁcant downside of separate chain-
ing is that it requires additional memory for the linked list. As an alternative, we implemented a chained
Hash-map, which uses a two pass algorithm: in the ﬁrst pass, the learned hash function is used to put items
into slots. If a slot is already taken, the item is skipped. Afterwards we use a separate chaining approach for
every skipped item except that we use the remaining free slots with offsets as pointers for them. As a result,
27


the utilization can be 100% (recall, we do not consider inserts) and the quality of the learned hash function
can only make an impact on the performance not the size: the fewer conﬂicts, the fewer cache misses. We
used a simple single stage multi-variate model as the learned hash function and implemented the Hash-map
including the model outside of our benchmarking framework to ensure a fair comparison.
Type
Time (ns)
Utilization
AVX Cuckoo, 32-bit value
31ns
99%
AVX Cuckoo, 20 Byte record
43ns
99%
Comm. Cuckoo, 20Byte record
90ns
95%
In-place chained Hash-map with learned hash functions, record
35ns
100%
Table 1: Hash-map alternative baselines
Like in Section B our records are 20 Bytes large and consist of a 64bit key, 64bit payload, and a 32bit
meta-data ﬁeld as commonly found in real applications (e.g., for delete ﬂags, version numbers, etc.). For
all Hash-map architectures we tried to maximize utilization and used records, except for the AVX Cuckoo
Hash-map where we also measured the performance for 32bit values. As the dataset we used the log-normal
data and the same hardware as before. The results are shown in Table 1.
The results for the AVX cuckoo Hash-map show that the payload has a signiﬁcant impact on the
performance. Going from 8 Byte to 20 Byte decreases the performance by almost 40%. Furthermore, the
commercial implementation which handles all corner cases but is not very AVX optimized slows down the
lookup by another factor of 2. In contrast, our learned hash functions with in-place chaining can provide
better lookup performance than even the cuckoo Hash-map for our records. The main take-aways from this
experiment is that learned hash functions can be used with different Hash-map architectures and that the
beneﬁts and disadvantages highly depend on the implementation, data and workload.
D
Future Directions for Learned B-Trees
In the main part of the paper, we have focused on index-structures for read-only, in-memory database systems.
Here we outline how the idea of learned index structures could be extended in the future.
D.1
Inserts and Updates
On ﬁrst sight, inserts seem to be the Achilles heel of learned indexes because of the potentially high cost
for learning models, but yet again learned indexes might have a signiﬁcant advantage for certain workloads.
In general we can distinguish between two types of inserts: (1) appends and (2) inserts in the middle like
updating a secondary index on the customer-id over an order table.
Let’s for the moment focus on the ﬁrst case: appends. For example, it is reasonable to assume that for
an index over the timestamps of web-logs, like in our previous experiments, most if not all inserts will be
appends with increasing timestamps. Now, let us further assume that our model generalizes and is able to
learn the patterns, which also hold for the future data. As a result, updating the index structure becomes an
O(1) operation; it is a simple append and no change of the model itself is needed, whereas a B-Tree requires
O(log n) operations to keep the B-Tree balance. A similar argument can also be made for inserts in the
middle, however, those might require to move data or reserve space within the data, so that the new items can
be put into the right place.
Obviously, this observation also raises several questions. First, there seems to be an interesting trade-off
in the generalizability of the model and the “last mile” performance; the better the “last mile” prediction,
arguably, the more the model is overﬁtting and less able to generalize to new data items.
28


Second, what happens if the distribution changes? Can it be detected, and is it possible to provide
similar strong guarantees as B-Trees which always guarantee O(logn) look-up and insertion costs? While
answering this question goes beyond the scope of this paper, we believe that it is possible for certain models
to achieve it. More importantly though, machine learning offers new ways to adapt the models to changes in
the data distribution, such as online learning, which might be more effective than traditional B-Tree balancing
techniques. Exploring them also remains future work.
Finally, it should be pointed out that there always exists a much simpler alternative to handling inserts
by building a delta-index [60]. All inserts are kept in buffer and from time to time merged with a potential
retraining of the model. This approach is already widely used, for example in Bigtable [23] and many other
systems, and was recently explored in [32] for learned indexes.
D.2
Paging
Throughout this section we assumed that the data, either the actual records or the <key,pointer> pairs,
are stored in one continuous block. However, especially for indexes over data stored on disk, it is quite
common to partition the data into larger pages that are stored in separate regions on disk. To that end, our
observation that a model learns the CDF no longer holds true as pos = Pr(X < Key) ∗N is violated. In the
following we outline several options to overcome this issue:
Leveraging the RMI structure: The RMI structure already partitions the space into regions. With small
modiﬁcations to the learning process, we can minimize how much models overlap in the regions they cover.
Furthermore, it might be possible to duplicate any records which might be accessed by more than one model.
Another option is to have an additional translation table in the form of <first_key, disk-position>.
With the translation table the rest of the index structure remains the same. However, this idea will work best
if the disk pages are very large. At the same time it is possible to use the predicted position with the min- and
max-error to reduce the number of bytes which have to be read from a large page, so that the impact of the
page size might be negligible.
With more complex models, it might actually be possible to learn the actual pointers of the pages.
Especially if a ﬁle-system is used to determine the page on disk with a systematic numbering of the blocks on
disk (e.g., block1,...,block100) the learning process can remain the same.
Obviously, more investigation is required to better understand the impact of learned indexes for disk-based
systems. At the same time the signiﬁcant space savings as well as speed beneﬁts make it a very interesting
avenue for future work.
E
Further Bloom ﬁlter Results
In Section 5.1.2, we propose an alternative approach to a learned Bloom ﬁlter where the classiﬁer output is
discretized and used as an additional hash function in the traditional Bloom ﬁlter setup. Preliminary results
demonstrate that this approach in some cases outperforms the results listed in Section 5.2, but as the results
depend on the discretization scheme, further analysis is worthwhile. We describe below these additional
experiments.
As before, we assume we have a model model f(x) →[0, 1] that maps keys to the range [0, 1]. In this
case, we allocate m bits for a bitmap M where we set M[⌊mf(x)⌋] = 1 for all inserted keys x ∈K. We can
then observe the FPR by observing what percentage of non-keys in the validation set map to a location in
the bitmap with a value of 1, i.e. FPRm ≡
P
x∈˜
U M[⌊f(x)m⌋]
| ˜U|
. In addition, we have a traditional Bloom ﬁlter
with false positive rate FPRB. We say that a query q is predicted to be a key if M[⌊f(q)m⌋] = 1 and the
Bloom ﬁlter also returns that it is a key. As such, the overall FPR of the system is FPRm × FPRB; we can
29


determine the size of the traditional Bloom ﬁlter based on it’s false positive rate FPRB =
p∗
FPRm where p∗is
the desired FPR for the whole system.
As in Section 5.2, we test our learned Bloom ﬁlter on data from Google’s transparency report. We use
the same character RNN trained with a 16-dimensional width and 32-dimensional character embeddings.
Scanning over different values for m, we can observe the total size of the model, bitmap for the learned Bloom
ﬁlter, and the traditional Bloom ﬁlter. For a desired total FPR p∗= 0.1%, we ﬁnd that setting m = 1000000
gives a total size of 2.21MB, a 27.4% reduction in memory, compared to the 15% reduction following the
approach in Section 5.1.1 and reported in Section 5.2. For a desired total FPR p∗= 1% we get a total size of
1.19MB, a 41% reduction in memory, compared to the 36% reduction reported in Section 5.2.
These results are a signiﬁcant improvement over those shown in Section 5.2. However, typical measures
of accuracy or calibration do not match this discretization procedure, and as such further analysis would be
valuable to understand how well model accuracy aligns with it’s suitability as a hash function.
30


