--- Paper: Levandoski_2013.pdf ---

The Bw-Tree: A B-tree for New Hardware
Platforms
Justin J. Levandoski 1, David B. Lomet 2, Sudipta Sengupta 3
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA 98052, USA
1justin.levandoski@microsoft.com,
2lomet@microsoft.com,
3sudipta@microsoft.com
Abstract— The emergence of new hardware and platforms has
led to reconsideration of how data management systems are
designed. However, certain basic functions such as key indexed
access to records remain essential. While we exploit the common
architectural layering of prior systems, we make radically new
design decisions about each layer. Our new form of B-tree, called
the Bw-tree achieves its very high performance via a latch-free
approach that effectively exploits the processor caches of modern
multi-core chips. Our storage manager uses a unique form of log
structuring that blurs the distinction between a page and a record
store and works well with ﬂash storage. This paper describes the
architecture and algorithms for the Bw-tree, focusing on the main
memory aspects. The paper includes results of our experiments
that demonstrate that this fresh approach produces outstanding
performance.
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Atomic Record Stores
There has been much recent discussion of No-SQL systems,
which are essentially atomic record stores (ARSs) [1]. While
some of these systems are intended as stand-alone products,
an atomic record store can also be a component of a more
complete transactional system, given appropriate control op-
erations [2], [3]. Indeed, one can regard a database system as
including an atomic record store as part of its kernel.
An ARS supports the reading and writing of individual
records, each identiﬁed by a key. Further, a tree-based ARS
supports high performance key-sequential access to designated
subranges of the keys. It is this combination of random and
key-sequential access that has made B-trees the indexing method
of choice within database systems.
However, an ARS is more than an access method. It includes
the management of stable storage and the requirement that
its updates be recoverable should the system crash. It is the
performance of the ARS of this more inclusive form that is
the foundation for the performance of any system in which the
ARS is embedded, including full function database systems.
This paper introduces a new ARS that provides very high
performance. We base our ARS on a new form of B-tree that
we call the Bw-tree. The techniques that we introduce make
the Bw-tree and its associated storage manager particularly ap-
propriate for the new hardware environment that has emerged
over the last several years.
Our focus in this paper is on the main memory aspects of
the Bw-tree. We describe the details of our latch-free tech-
nique, i.e., how we can do updates and structure modiﬁcation
operations without setting latches. Our approach also carefully
avoids cache line invalidations, hence leading to substantially
better caching performance as well. We describe how we use
our log structured storage manager at a high level, but leave
the speciﬁcs to another paper.
B. The New Environment
Database systems have mostly exploited the same storage
and CPU infrastructure since the 1970s. That infrastructure
used disks for persistent storage. Disk latency is now analo-
gous to a round trip to Pluto [4]. It used processors whose
uni-processor performance increased with Moore’s Law, thus
limiting the need for high levels of concurrent execution on a
single machine. Processors are no longer providing ever higher
uni-core performance. Succinctly, ”this changes things”.
1) Design for Multi-core: We live in a high peak perfor-
mance multi-core world. Uni-core speed will at best increase
modestly, thus we need to get better at exploiting a large
number of cores by addressing at least two important aspects:
1) Multi-core cpus mandate high concurrency. But, as the
level of concurrency increases, latches are more likely
to block, limiting scalability [5].
2) Good multi-core processor performance depends on high
CPU cache hit ratios. Updating memory in place results
in cache invalidations, so how and when updates are
done needs great care.
Addressing the ﬁrst issue, the Bw-tree is latch-free, ensuring a
thread never yields or even re-directs its activity in the face of
conﬂicts. Addressing the second issue, the Bw-tree performs
“delta” updates that avoid updating a page in place, hence
preserving previously cached lines of pages.
2) Design for Modern Storage Devices: Disk latency is a
major problem. But even more crippling is their low I/O ops
per second. Flash storage offers higher I/O ops per second at
lower cost. This is key to reducing costs for OLTP systems.
Indeed Amazon’s DynamoDB includes an explicit ability to
exploit ﬂash [6]. Thus the Bw-tree targets ﬂash storage.
Flash has some performance idiosyncracies, however. While
ﬂash has fast random and sequential reads, it needs an erase cy-
cle prior to write, making random writes slower than sequential
writes [7]. While ﬂash SSDs typically have a mapping layer
(the FTL) to hide this discrepancy from users, a noticeable
slowdown still exists. As of 2011, even high-end FusionIO
drives exhibit a 3x faster sequential write performance than


random writes [8]. The Bw-tree performs log structuring it-
self at its storage layer. This approach avoids dependence on
the FTL and ensures that our write performance is as high
as possible for both high-end and low-end ﬂash devices and
hence, not the system bottleneck.
C. Our Contributions
We now describe our contributions, which are:
1) The Bw-tree is organized around a mapping table that
virtualizes both the location and the size of pages. This
virtualization is essential for both our main memory
latch-free approach and our log structured storage.
2) We update Bw-tree nodes by prepending update deltas
to the prior page state. Because our delta updating pre-
serves the prior page state, it improves processor cache
performance. Having the new node state at a new storage
location permits us to use the atomic compare and swap
instructions to update state. Hence, the Bw-tree is latch-
free in the classic sense of allowing concurrent access
to pages by multiple threads.
3) We have devised page splitting and merging structure
modiﬁcation operations (SMOs) for the Bw-tree. SMOs
are realized via multiple atomic operations, each of which
leaves the Bw-tree well-formed. Further, threads observ-
ing an in-progress SMO do not block, but rather take
steps to complete the SMO.
4) Our log structured store (LSS), while nominally a page
store, uses storage very efﬁciently by mostly posting
page change deltas (one or a few records). Pages are
eventually made contiguous via consolidating delta up-
dates, and also during a ﬂash “cleaning” process. LSS
will be described fully in a another paper.
5) We have designed and implemented an ARS based on
the Bw-tree and LSS. We have measured its performance
using real and synthetic workloads, and report on its very
high performance, greatly out-performing both Berke-
leyDB, an existing system designed for magnetic disks,
and latch-free skip lists in main memory.
In drawing broader lessons from this work, we believe that
latch free techniques and state changes that avoid update-in-
place are the keys to high performance on modern processors.
Further, we believe that log structuring is the way to provide
high storage performance, not only with ﬂash, but also with
disks. We think these “design paradigms” are applicable more
widely to realize high performance data management systems.
D. Paper Outline
We present an overview of Bw-tree architecture in Section 2.
In Sections 3 through 5, we describe the system we built.
We start at the top layer with in-memory page organization
in Section 3, followed by Bw-tree organization and structure
modiﬁcations in Section 4. Section 5 details how the cache is
managed. In Section 6, we describe our experiments and the
performance results of them. Section 7 describes related work
and how we differ signiﬁcantly in our approach. We conclude
with a short discussion in Section 8.
Flash Layer
Bw-tree Layer
API
Cache Layer
Mapping Table
In-memory pages only
Tree-based search/update logic
Logical page abstraction for B-tree layer
Maintains mapping table, brings pages 
from flash to RAM as necessary
Manages writes to flash storage
Flash garbage collection
Fig. 1.
The architecture of our Bw-tree atomic record store.
II. BW-TREE ARCHITECTURE
The Bw-tree atomic record store (ARS) is a classic B+-
tree [9] in many respects. It provides logarithmic access to
keyed records from a one-dimensional key range, while pro-
viding linear time access to sub-ranges. Our ARS has a classic
architecture as depicted in Figure 1. The access method layer,
our Bw-tree Layer, is at the top. It interacts with the middle
Cache Layer. The cache manager is built on top of the Storage
Layer, which implements our log-structured store (LSS). The
LSS currently exploits ﬂash storage, but it could manage with
either ﬂash or disk.
This design is architecturally compatible with existing
database kernels, while also being suitable as a standalone
“data component” in a decoupled transactional system [2],
[3]. However, there are signiﬁcant departures from this classic
picture. In this section, we provide an architectural overview
of the Bw-tree ARS, describing why it is uniquely well-suited
for multi-core processors and ﬂash based stable storage.
A. Modern Hardware Sensitive
In our Bw-tree design, threads almost never block. Elimi-
nating latches is our main technique. Instead of latches, we in-
stall state changes using the atomic compare and swap (CAS)
instruction. The Bw-tree only blocks when it needs to fetch
a page from stable storage (the LSS), which is rare with a
large main memory cache. This persistence of thread execution
helps preserve core instruction caches, and avoids thread idle
time and context switch costs. Further, the Bw-tree performs
node updates via ”delta updates” (attaching the update to an
existing page), not via update-in-place (updating the existing
page memory). Avoiding update-in-place reduces CPU cache
invalidation, resulting in higher cache hit ratios. Reducing
cache misses increases the instructions executed per cycle.
Performance of data management systems is frequently
gated by I/O access rates. We have chosen to target ﬂash
storage to ease that problem. But even with ﬂash, when
attached as an SSD, I/O access rates can limit performance.
Our log structure storage layer enables writing large buffers,
effectively eliminating any write bottle neck. Flash storage’s
high random read access rates coupled with a large main
memory cache minimizes blocking on reads. Writing large
multi-page buffers permits us to write variable size pages that
do no contain “ﬁller” to align to a uniform size boundary.
The rest of this section summarizes the major architectural
and algorithmic innovations that make concrete the points de-
scribed above.


B. The Mapping Table
Our cache layer maintains a mapping table, that maps logi-
cal pages to physical pages, logical pages being identiﬁed by a
logical ”page identiﬁer” or PID. The mapping table translates
a PID into either (1) a ﬂash offset, the address of a page on
stable storage, or (2) a memory pointer, the address of the page
in memory. The mapping table is thus the central location for
managing our “paginated” tree. While this indirection tech-
nique is not unique to our approach, we exploit it as the base
for several innovations. We use PIDs in the Bw-tree to link the
nodes of the tree. For instance, all downward “search” pointers
between Bw-tree nodes are PIDs, not physical pointers.
The mapping table severs the connection between physical
location and inter-node links. This enables the physical loca-
tion of a Bw-tree node to change on every update and every
time a page is written to stable storage, without requiring that
the location change be propagated to the root of the tree (i.e.,
updating inter-node links). This “relocation” tolerance directly
enables both delta updating of the node in main memory and
log structuring of our stable storage, as described below.
Bw-tree nodes are thus logical and do not occupy ﬁxed
physical locations, either on stable storage or in main memory.
Hence we are free to mold them to our needs. A “page” for a
node thus suggests a policy, not a requirement, either in terms
of how we represent nodes or how large they might become.
We permit page size to be elastic, meaning that we can split
when convenient as size constraints do not impose a splitting
requirement.
C. Delta Updating
Page state changes are done by creating a delta record (de-
scribing the change) and prepending it to an existing page
state. We install the (new) memory address of the delta record
into the page’s physical address slot in the mapping table
using the atomic compare and swap (CAS) instruction1. If
successful, the delta record address becomes the new physi-
cal address for the page. This strategy is used both for data
changes (e.g., inserting a record) and management changes
(e.g., a page being split or ﬂushing a page to stable storage).
Occasionally, we consolidate pages (create a new page that
applies all delta changes) to both reduce memory footprint and
to improve search performance. A consolidated form of the
page is also installed with a CAS, and the prior page structure
is garbage collected (i.e., its memory reclaimed). A reference
to the entire data structure for the page, including deltas, is
placed on a pending list all of which will be reclaimed when
safe. We use a form of epoch to accomplish safe garbage
collection, [10].
Our delta updating simultaneously enables latch-free access
in the Bw-tree and preserves processor data caches by avoiding
update-in-place. The Bw-tree mapping table is the key enabler
of these features via its ability to isolate the effects of node
updates to that node alone.
1The CAS is an atomic instruction that compares a given old value to a
current value at memory location L, if the values are equal the instruction
writes a new value to L, replacing current.
D. Bw-tree Structure Modiﬁcations
Latches do not protect parts of our index tree during struc-
ture modiﬁcations (SMOs) such as page splits. This introduces
a problem. For example, a page split introduces changes to
more than one page: the original overly large page O, the new
page N that will receive half O′s contents, and the parent in-
dex page P that points down to O, and that must subsequently
point to both O and N. Thus, we cannot install a page split
with a single CAS. A similar but harder problem arises when
we merge nodes that have become too small.
To deal with this problem, we break an SMO into a sequence
of atomic actions, each installable via a CAS. We use a B-link
design [11] to make this easier. With a side link in each page,
we can decompose a node split into two “half split” atomic
actions. In order to make sure that no thread has to wait for
an SMO to complete, a thread that sees a partial SMO will
complete it before proceeding with its own operation. This
ensures that no thread needs to wait for an SMO to complete.
E. Log Structured Store
Our LSS has the usual advantages of log structuring [12].
Pages are written sequentially in a large batch, greatly reducing
the number of separate write I/Os required. However, because
of garbage collection, log structuring normally incurs extra
writes to relocate pages that persist in reclaimed storage areas
of the log. Our LSS design greatly reduces this problem.
When ﬂushing a page, the LSS need only ﬂush the deltas
that represent the changes made to the page since its previous
ﬂush. This dramatically reduces how much data is written
during a ﬂush, increasing the number of pages that ﬁt in the
ﬂush buffer, and hence reducing the number of I/O’s per page.
There is a penalty on reads, however, as the discontinuous parts
of pages all must be read to return a page to the main memory
cache. Here is when the very high random read performance
of ﬂash really contributes to our ARS performance.
The LSS cleans prior parts of ﬂash representing the old parts
of its log storage. Delta ﬂushing reduces pressure on the LSS
cleaner by reducing the amount of storage used per page. This
reduces the “write ampliﬁcation” that is a characteristic of log
structuring. During cleaning, LSS makes pages and their deltas
contiguous for improved access performance.
F. Managing Transactional Logs
As in a conventional database system, our ARS needs to
ensure that updates persist across system crashes. We tag each
update operation with a unique identiﬁer that is typically the
log sequence number (LSN) of the update on the transactional
log (maintained elsewhere, e.g., in a transactional component).
LSNs are managed so as to support recovery idempotence, i.e.,
ensuring that operations are executed at most once.
Like conventional systems, pages are ﬂushed lazily while
honoring the write-ahead log protocol (WAL). Unconvention-
ally, however, we do not block page ﬂushes to enforce WAL.
Instead, because the recent updates are separate deltas from
the rest of the page, we can remove “recent” updates (not yet
on the stable transactional log) from pages when ﬂushing.


LPID Ptr
Page P
P
∆D
CAS
(a) Update using delta record
LPID Ptr
Page P
P
∆
∆
∆
Consolidated 
Page P
CAS
(b) Consolidating a page
Fig. 2.
In-memory pages. Page updates use compare-and-swap (CAS) on
the physical pointer in the mapping table.
III. IN-MEMORY LATCH FREE PAGES
This section describes Bw-tree in-memory pages. We begin
by discussing the basic page structure and how we update
pages in a latch-free manner. We then discuss occasional page
consolidation used to make search more efﬁcient. Using a
tree based index enables range scans, and we describe how
this is accomplished. Finally, we discuss in-memory garbage
collection with our epoch safety mechanism.
A. Elastic Virtual Pages
The information stored on a Bw-tree page is similar to that
of a typical B+-tree. Internal index nodes contain (separator
key,pointer) pairs sorted by key that direct searches down the
tree. Data (leaf) nodes contain (key, record) pairs. In addition,
pages also contain (1) a low key representing the smallest key
value that can be stored on the page (and in the subtree below),
and (2) a high key representing the largest key value that can
be stored on the page, and (3) a side link pointer that points
to the node’s immediate right sibling on the same level in the
tree, as in a B-link tree [11].
Two distinct features make the Bw-tree page design unique.
First, Bw-tree pages are logical, meaning they do not occupy
ﬁxed physical locations or have ﬁxed sizes. (1) We identify
a page using its PID index into the mapping table. Accessors
to the page use the mapping table to translate the PID into
its current physical address. All links between Bw-tree nodes
(“search” pointers, side links) are PIDs. (2) Pages are elastic,
meaning there is no hard limit on how large a page may grow.
Pages grow by having “delta records” prepended to them.
A delta record represents a single record modiﬁcation (e.g.,
insert, update), or system management operation (e.g., page
split).
Updates. We never update a Bw-tree page in place (i.e.,
modify its memory contents). Rather, we create a delta record
describing the update and prepend it to the existing page.
Delta records allow us to incrementally update page state in
a latch-free manner. We ﬁrst create a new delta record D that
(physically) points to the page’s current address P. We obtain
P from the page’s entry in the mapping table. The memory
address of the delta record will serve as the new memory
address (the new state) for the page.
To install the new page state in the mapping table (making
it “live” in the index), we use the atomic compare and swap
(CAS) instruction (described in Section II) to replace the cur-
rent address P with the address of D. The CAS compares P to
the current address in the mapping table. If the current address
equals P, the CAS successfully installs D, otherwise it fails
(we discuss CAS failures later). Since all pointers between
Bw-tree nodes are via PIDs, the CAS on the mapping table
entry is the only physical pointer change necessary to install a
page update. Furthermore, this latch-free technique is the only
way to update a page in the Bw-tree, and is uniform across
all operations that modify a page. In the rest of this paper,
we refer to using the CAS to update a page as “installing” an
operation.
Figure 2(a) depicts the update process showing a delta record
D prepended to page P. The dashed line from the mapping
table to P represents P’s old address, while the solid line to
the delta record represents P’s new physical address. Since
updates are atomic, only one updater can “win” if there are
competing threads trying install a delta against the same “old”
state in the mapping table. A thread must retry its update if it
fails2.
After several updates, a “delta chain” forms on a page as
depicted in the lower right of Figure 2(b) (showing a chain
of three deltas). Each new successful updates forms the new
“root” of the delta chain. This means the physical structure of
a Bw-tree page consists of a delta chain prepended to a base
page (i.e., a consolidate B-tree node). For clarity, we refer
to a base page as the structure to which the delta chain is
prepended, and refer to a page as the a base page along with
its (possibly empty) delta chain.
Leaf-level update operations. At the leaf page level, up-
dates (deltas) are one of three types: (1) insert, representing
a new record inserted on the page; (2) modify, representing
a modiﬁcation to an existing record in the page; (3) delete,
representing the removal of an existing record in the page. All
update deltas contain an LSN provided by the client issuing the
update. We use this LSN for transactional recovery involving
a transaction log manager with its need to enforce the write-
ahead-log (WAL) protocol (we discuss WAL and LSNs further
in Section V-A). Insert and update deltas contain a record
representing the new payload, while delete deltas only contain
the key of the record to be removed. In the rest of this sec-
tion, we discuss only record updates to leaf pages, postponing
discussion of other updates (e.g., index pages, splits, ﬂushes)
until later in the paper.
Page search. Leaf page search involves traversing the delta
chain (if present). The search stops at the ﬁrst occurrence of
the search key in the chain. If the delta containing the key
represents an insert or update, the search succeeds and returns
the record. If the delta represents a delete, the search fails. If
the delta chain does not contain the key, the search performs
a binary search on the base page in typical B-tree fashion. We
discuss index page search with delta chains in Section IV.
B. Page Consolidation
Search performance eventually degrades if delta chains grow
too long. To combat this, we occasionally perform page con-
2The retry protocol will depend on the speciﬁc update operation. We discuss speciﬁc
retry protocols where appropriate.


solidation that creates a new “re-organized” base page contain-
ing all the entries from the original base page as modiﬁed by
the updates from the delta chain. We trigger consolidation if
an accessor thread, during a page search, notices a delta chain
length has exceeded a system threshold. The thread performs
consolidation after attempting its update (or read) operation.
When consolidating, the thread ﬁrst creates a new base page
(a new block of memory). It then populates the base page with
a sorted vector containing the most recent version of a record
from either the delta chain or old base page (deleted records
are discarded). The thread then installs the new address of
the consolidated page in the mapping table with a CAS. If
it succeeds, the thread requests garbage collection (memory
reclamation) of the old page state. Figure 2(b) provides an
example depicting the consolidation of page P that incorpo-
rates deltas into a new “Consolidated Page P”. If this CAS
fails, the thread abandons the operation by deallocating the
new page. The thread does not retry, as a subsequent thread
will eventually perform a successful consolidation.
C. Range Scans
A range scan is speciﬁed by a key range (low key, high
key). Either of the boundary keys can be omitted, meaning that
one end of the range is open-ended. A scan will also specify
either an ascending or descending key order for delivering the
records. Our description here assumes both boundary keys are
provided and the ordering is ascending. The other scan options
are simple variants.
A scan maintains a cursor providing a key indicating how
far the search has progressed. For a new scan, the remembered
key is lowkey. When a data page containing data in the range
is ﬁrst accessed, we construct a vector of records containing
all records on the page to be processed as part of the scan.
In the absence of changes to the page during the scan, this
allows us to efﬁciently provide the “next-record” functionality.
This is the common case and needs to be executed with high
performance.
We treat each ”next-record” operation as an atomic unit. The
entire scan is not atomic. Transactional locking will prevent
modiﬁcations to records we have seen (assuming serializable
transactions) but we do not know the form of concurrency
control used for records we have not yet delivered. So before
delivering a record from our vector, we check whether an
update has affected the yet unreturned subrange in our record
vector. If such an update has occurred, we reconstruct the
record vector accordingly.
D. Garbage Collection
A latch-free environment does not permit exclusive access
to shared data structures (e.g., Bw-tree pages), meaning one or
more readers can be active in a page state even as it is being
updated. We do not want to deallocate memory still accessed
by another thread. For example, during consolidation, a thread
“swaps out” the old state of a page (i.e., delta chain plus base
page) for a new consolidated state and requests that the old
state be garbage collected. However, we must take care not to
LPID Ptr
Page P
P
O
Q
Page Q
Page R
(a) Creating sibling page Q
LPID Ptr
Page P
P
O
Q
Page Q
Page R
Split ∆
CAS
(b) Installing split delta
LPID Ptr
Page P
P
O
Q
Page Q
Page R
Split ∆
CAS
Index entry ∆
(c) Installing index entry delta
Fig. 3.
Split example. Dashed arrows represent logical pointers, while solid
arrows represent physical pointers.
deallocate the old page state while another thread still accesses
it. Similar concerns arise when a page is removed from the
Bw-tree. That is, other threads may still be able to access
the now removed page. We must protect these threads from
accessing reclaimed and potentially “repurposed” objects by
preventing reclamation until such access is no longer possible.
This is done by a thread executing within an “epoch”.
An epoch mechanism is a way of protecting objects be-
ing deallocated from being re-used too early [10]. A thread
joins an epoch when it wants to protect objects it is using
(e.g., searching) from being reclaimed. It exits the epoch when
this dependency is ﬁnished. Typically, a thread’s duration in
an epoch is for a single operation (e.g. insert, next-record).
Threads “enrolled” in epoch E might have seen earlier ver-
sions of objects that are being deallocated in epoch E. How-
ever, a thread enrolled in epoch E cannot have seen objects
deallocated in epoch E-1 because it had not yet started its
dependency interval. Hence, once all threads enrolled in epoch
E have completed and exited the epoch (“drained”), it is safe
to recycle the objects deallocated in epoch E. We use epochs
to protect both storage and deallocated PIDs. Until the epoch
has drained such objects cannot be recycled.
IV. BW-TREE STRUCTURE MODIFICATIONS
All Bw-tree structure modiﬁcation operations (SMOs) are
performed in a latch-free manner. To our knowledge, this has
never been done before, and is crucial for our design. We ﬁrst
describe node splits, followed by node merges. We then dis-
cuss how to ensure an SMO has completed prior to performing
actions that depend on the SMO. This is essential both to avoid
confusion in main memory and to prevent possible corrupt
trees should the system crash at an inopportune time.
A. Node Split
Splits are triggered by an accessor thread that notices a page
size has grown beyond a system threshold. After attempting
its operation, the thread performs the split.
The Bw-tree employs the B-link atomic split installation
technique that works in two phases [11]. We ﬁrst atomically


install the split at the child (e.g., leaf) level. This is called a
half split. We then atomically update the parent node with the
new index term containing a new separator key and a pointer
to the newly created split page. This process may continue re-
cursively up the tree as necessary. The B-link structure allows
us to separate the split into two atomic actions, since the side
link provides a valid search tree after installing the split at the
child level.
Child Split. To split a node P, the B-tree layer requests
(from the cache layer) allocation for a new node Q in the
mapping table (Q is the new right sibling of P). We then
ﬁnd the appropriate separator key KP from P that provides a
balanced split and proceed to create a new consolidated base
state for Q containing the records from P with keys greater
than KP . Page Q also contains a side link to the former right
sibling of P (call this page R). We next install the physical
address of Q in the mapping table. This installation is done
without a CAS, since Q is visible to only the split thread.
Figure 3(a) depicts this scenario, where a new sibling page
Q contains half the records of P, and (logically) points to
page R (the right sibling of P). At this point, the original
(unsplit) state of P is still present in the mapping table, and
Q is invisible to the rest of the index.
We atomically install the split by prepending a split delta
record to P. The split delta contains two pieces of information:
(1) the separator key KP used to invalidate all records within
P greater than KP , since Q now contains these records and
(2) a logical side pointer to the new sibling Q. This installation
completes the ﬁrst “half split”. Figure 3(b) depicts such a
scenario after prepending a split delta to page P pointing to
its new sibling page Q. At this point, the index is valid, even
without the presence of an index term for Q in the parent node
O. All searches for a key contained within Q will ﬁrst go to
P. Upon encountering the split delta on P, the search will
traverse the side link to Q when the search key is greater than
separator key KP . Meanwhile, all searches for keys less than
the KP remain at P.
Parent Update. In order to direct searches directly to Q,
we prepend an index term delta record to the parent of P and
Q to complete the second half split. This index delta contains
(1) KP , the separator key between P and Q, (2) a logical
pointer to Q, and (3) KQ, the separator key for Q (formerly
the separator directing searches to P). We remember our path
down the tree (i.e. the PIDs of nodes on the path) and hence
can immediately identify the parent. Most of the time, the
remembered parent on the path will be the correct one and we
do the posting immediately. Occasionally the parent may have
been merged into another node. But our epoch mechanism
guarantees that we will see the appropriate deleted state that
will tell us this has happened. That is, we are guaranteed that
the parent PID will not be a dangling reference. When we
detect a deleted state, we go up the tree to the grandparent
node, etc., and do a re-traversal down the tree to ﬁnd the
parent that is “still alive”.
Having KP and KQ present in the boundary key delta
is an optimization to improve search speed. Since searches
must now traverse a delta chain on the index nodes, ﬁnding
a boundary key delta in the chain such that a search key v
is greater than KP and less than or equal to KQ allows the
search to end instantly and follow the logical pointer down to
Q. Otherwise, the search continues into the base page, which is
searched with a simple binary search to ﬁnd the correct pointer
to follow. Figure 3(c) depicts our running split example after
prepending the index entry delta to parent page O, where the
dashed line represents the logical pointer to page Q.
Consolidations. Posting deltas decreases latency when in-
stalling splits, relative to creating and installing completely
new base pages. Decreasing latency decreases the chance of
“failed splits”, i.e., the case that other updates sneak in before
we try to install the split (and fail). However, we eventually
consolidate split pages at a later point in time. For pages with
split deltas, consolidation involves creating a new base page
containing records with keys less than the separator key in the
split delta. For pages with index entry deltas, we create a new
consolidated base page containing the new separator keys and
pointers.
B. Node Merge
Like splits, node merges are triggered when a thread en-
counters a node that is below some threshold size. We peform
the node merge in a latch-free manner, which is illustrated in
Figure 4. Merges are decidedly more complicated than splits,
and we need more atomic actions to accomplish them.
Marking for Delete. The node R to be merged (to be
removed) is updated with a remove node delta, as depicted
in Figure 4(a). This stops all further use of node R. A thread
encountering a remove node delta in R needs to read or update
the contents of R previously contained in R by going to the
left sibling, into which data from R will be merged.
Merging Children.The left sibling L of R is updated with a
node merge delta that physically points (via a memory address)
to the contents of R. Figure 4(b) illustrates what L and R
look like during a node merge. Note that the the node merge
delta indicates that the contents of R are to be included in L.
Further, it points directly to this state, which is now logically
considered to be part of L. This storage for R’s state is now
transferred to L (except for the remove node delta itself). It
will only be reclaimed when L is consolidated. This turns what
had previously been a linear delta chain representing a page
state into a tree.
When we search L (now responsible for containing both
its original key space and the key space that had been R’s)
the search becomes a tree search which directs the accessing
thread to either L’s original page or to the page that it sub-
sumed from R as a result of the merge. To enable this, the
node merge delta includes the separator key that enables the
search to proceed to the correct node.
Parent Update. The parent node P of R is now updated
by deleting its index term associated with R, shown in Fig-
ure 4(c). This is done by posting an index term delete delta
that includes not only that R is being deleted, but also that L
will now include data from the key space formerly contained


LPID Ptr
L
P
R
Page S
Page L
S
Remove 
Node ∆
Page R
(a) Posting remove node delta
LPID Ptr
L
P
R
Page S
Page L
S
Remove 
Node ∆
Page R
Merge ∆
(b) Posting merge delta
LPID Ptr
L
P
R
Page S
Page L
S
Remove 
Node ∆
Page R
Merge ∆
∆ Delete Index 
Term for R
(c) Posting index term delete delta
Fig. 4.
Merge example. Dashed arrows represent logical pointers, while solid
arrows represent physical pointers.
by R. The new range for L is explicitly included with a low
key equal to L’s prior low key and a high key equal to R’s
prior high key. As with node splits, this permits us to recognize
when a search needs to be directed to the newly changed part
of the tree. Further, it enables any search that drops through
all deltas to the base page to ﬁnd the right index term by a
simple binary search.
Once the index term delete delta is posted, all paths to R
are blocked. At this point we initiate the process of reclaiming
Rs PID. This involves posting the PID to the pending delete
list of PIDs for the currently active epoch. R’s PID will not
be recycled until all other threads that might have seen an
earlier state of R have exited the epoch. This is the same epoch
mechanism we use to protect page memory from premature
recycling (Section III-D).
C. Serializing Structure Modiﬁcations and Updates
Our Bw-tree implementation assumes that conﬂicting data
update operations are prevented by concurrency contol that is
elsewhere in the system. This could be in the lock manager
of an integrated database system, a transactional component
of a decoupled transactional system (e.g., Deuteronomy [2]),
or ﬁnally, an arbitrary interleaving of concurrent updates as
enabled as by an atomic record store.
However, “inside” the Bw-tree, we need to correctly seri-
alize data updates with SMOs and SMOs with other SMOs.
That is, we must be able to construct a serial schedule for
everything that occurs in the Bw-tree, where data updates and
SMOs are treated as the units of atomicity. This is nontrivial.
We want to treat an SMO as atomic (think of them as system
transactions), and we are doing this without using latches that
could conceal the fact that there are multiple steps involved in
an SMO. One way to think about this is that if a thread stum-
bles upon an incomplete SMO, it is like seeing uncommitted
state. Being latch-free, the Bw-tree cannot prevent this from
happening. Our response is to require that such a thread must
complete and commit the SMO it encounters before it can
either (1) post its update or (2) continue with its own SMO.
For page splits, that means that when an updater or another
SMO would traverse a side pointer to reach the correct page,
it must complete the split SMO by posting the new index term
delta to the parent. Only then can it continue on to its own
activity. That forces the incomplete SMO to be “committed”
and to serialize before the interrupted action the thread had
started upon.
The same principle applies regardless of whether the SMO
is a split or a node merge. When deleting a node R, we
access its left sibling L to post the merge delta. If we ﬁnd
that L is being deleted, we are seeing an in progress and
incomplete “earlier” system transaction. We need the delete
of R to serialize after the delete of L in this case. Hence
the thread deleting R needs to ﬁrst complete the delete of
L. Only then can this thread complete the delete of R. All
combinations of SMO are serialized in the same manner. This
can lead to the processing of a “stack” of SMOs, but given
the rarity of this situation, it should not occur often, and is
reasonably straightforward to implement recursively.
V. CACHE MANAGEMENT
The cache layer is responsible for reading, ﬂushing, and
swapping pages between memory and ﬂash. It maintains the
mapping table and provides the abstraction of logical pages
to the Bw-tree layer. When the Bw-tree layer requests a page
reference using a PID, the cache layer returns the address in
the mapping table if it is a memory pointer. Otherwise, if
the address is a ﬂash offset (the page is not in memory), it
reads the page from the LSS to memory, installs the memory
address in the mapping table (using a CAS), and returns the
new memory pointer. All updates to pages, including those
involving page management operations like split and page
ﬂush involve CAS operations on the mapping table at the
location indexed by the PID.
Pages in main memory are occasionally ﬂushed) to stable
storage for a number of reasons. For instance, the cache layer
will ﬂush updates to enable the checkpointing of a transac-
tional log when the Bw-tree is part of a transactional system.
Page ﬂushes also precede a page swapout, installing a ﬂash
offset in the mapping table and reclaiming page memory in
order to reduce memory usage. With multiple threads ﬂush-
ing pages to ﬂash, multiple page ﬂushes that need a correct
ordering must be done very carefully. We describe one such
scenario for node splits in this section.
To keep track of which version of the page is on stable
storage (the LSS) and where it is, we use a ﬂush delta record,
which is installed at the mapping table entry for the page
using a CAS. Flush delta records also record which changes
to a page have been ﬂushed so that subsequent ﬂushes send
only incremental page changes to stable storage. When a page
ﬂush succeeds, the ﬂush delta contains the new ﬂash offset
and ﬁelds describing the state of the page that was ﬂushed.
The rest section focuses on how the cache layer interacts
with the LSS layer by preparing and performing page ﬂushes
(LSS details covered in future work). We start by describing
how ﬂushes to LSS are coordinated with the demands of a
separate transactional mechanism. We then describe the me-
chanics of how ﬂushes are executed.


A. Write Ahead Log Protocol and LSNs
The Bw-tree is an ARS that can be included in a transac-
tional system. When included, it needs to manage the trans-
actional aspects imposed on it. The Deuteronomy [2] archi-
tecture makes those aspects overt as part of its protocol be-
tween transactional (TC) and data component (DC), so we
use Deuteronomy terminology to describe this functionality.
Similar considerations apply in other transactional settings.
LSNs. Record insert and update deltas in a the Bw-tree page
are tagged with the Log Sequence Number (LSN) of their op-
erations. The highest LSN among updates ﬂushed is recorded
in the ﬂush delta describing the ﬂush. LSNs are generated by
the higher-level TC and are used by its transactional log.
Transaction Log Coordination. Whenever the TC appends
(ﬂushes) to its stable transactional log, it updates the End of
Stable Log (ESL) LSN value. ESL is an LSN such that all
lower valued LSNs are deﬁnitely in the stable log. Periodically,
it sends an updated ESL value to the DC. It is necessary for
enforcing causality via the write-ahead log protocol (WAL)
that the DC not make durable any operation with an LSN
greater than the latest ESL. This ensures that the DC is “run-
ning behind” the TC in terms of operations made durable. To
enforce this rule, records on a page that have LSNs larger than
the ESL are not included in a page when ﬂushed to the LSS.
Page ﬂushes in the DC are required by the TC when it ad-
vances its Redo-Scan-Start-Point (RSSP). When the TC wishes
to advance the RSSP, it proposes an RSSPit to the DC. The
intent is for this to permit the TC to truncate (drop) the portion
of the transactional log earlier than the RSSP. The TC will
then wait for an acknowledgement from the DC indicating that
the DC has made every update with an LSN < RSSP stable.
Because these operations results are stable, the TC no longer
has to send these operations to the DC during redo recovery.
For the DC to comply, it needs to ﬂush the records on every
page that have LSNs < RSSP before it acknowledges to the
TC. Such ﬂushes are never blocked as the cache manager can
exclude every record with an LSN > ESL. Non-blocking is not
possible with a conventional update-in-place approach using a
single page-wide LSN.
To enable this non-blocking behavior, we restrict page con-
solidation (Section III-B) to include only update deltas that
have LSNs less than or equal to the ESL. Because of this, we
can always exclude these deltas when we ﬂush the page.
Bw-tree Structure Modiﬁcations. We wrap a system trans-
action [3] around the pages we log as part of Bw-tree SMOs.
This solves the problem of concurrent SMOs that can result
from our latch-free approach (e.g., two threads trying to split
the same page). To keep what is in the LSS consistent with
main memory, we do not commit the SMO system transaction
with its updated pages until we know that its thread has “won”
the race to install an SMO delta record at the appropriate page.
Thus, we allow concurrent SMOs, but ensure that at most one
of them can commit. The begin and end system transaction
records are among the very few objects ﬂushed to the LSS
that are not instances of pages.
B. Flushing Pages to the LSS
The LSS provides a large buffer into which the cache man-
ager posts pages and system transactions describing Bw-tree
structure modiﬁcations. We give a brief overview of this func-
tionality. Details will be described in another paper.
Page Marshalling. The cache manager marshalls the bytes
from the pointer representation of the page in main memory
into a linear representation that can be written to the ﬂush
buffer. The page state is captured at the time it is intended to
be ﬂushed. This is important as later updates might violate the
WAL protocol or a page split may have removed records that
need to be captured in LSS. For example, the page may be split
and consolidated while an earlier ﬂush request for it is being
posted to the ﬂush buffer. If the bytes for the earlier ﬂush are
marshalled after the split has removed the upper order keys in
the pre-split page, the version of the page captured in the LSS
will not have these records. Should the system crash before
the rest of the split itself is ﬂushed, those records will be lost.
When marshalling records on a page for ﬂush, multiple delta
records are consolidated so that they appear contiguously in
the LSS.
Incremental Flushing. When ﬂushing a page, the cache man-
ager only marshals those delta records which have an LSN
between the previously ﬂushed largest LSN on that page and
the current ESL value. The previously ﬂushed largest LSN
information is contained in the latest ﬂush delta record on the
page (as described above).
Incremental ﬂushing of pages means that the LSS consumes
much less storage for a page than is the case for full page
ﬂushing. This is very valuable for a log structured store such
as our LSS for two reasons. (1) It means that a ﬂush buffer
can hold far more updates across different pages than if the
entire state of every page were ﬂushed. This increases the
writing efﬁciency on a per page basis. (2) The log structured
store cleaner (garbage collector) does not need to work as
hard since storage is not being consumed as fast. This reduces
the execution cost per page for the cleaner. It also reduces
the ”write ampliﬁcation”, i.e. the requirement of re-writing
unchanged pages when the cleaner encounters them.
Flush Activity. The ﬂush buffer aggregates writes to LSS up
to a conﬁgurable threshold (currently set at 1MB) to reduce
I/O overhead. It uses ping-pong (double) buffers and alternates
between them with asynchronous I/O calls to the LSS so that
the buffer for the next batch of page ﬂushes can be prepared
while the current one is in progress.
After the I/O completes for a ﬂush buffer, the states of the
respective pages are updated in the mapping table. The result
of the ﬂush is captured in the mapping table by means of a
ﬂush delta describing the ﬂush, which is prepended to the state
and installed via a CAS like any other delta. If the ﬂush has
captured all the updates to the page, the page is “clean” in
that there are no uncaptured updates not stable on the LSS.
The cache manager monitors the memory used by the Bw-
tree, and when it exceeds a conﬁgurable threshold, it attempts
to swap out pages to the LSS. Once a page is clean, it can be
evicted from the cache. The storage for the state of an evicted


0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2
4
8
16
32
Operations/Second (M)
Delta Chain Length
Synthetic
Xbox
Fig. 5.
Effect of Delta Chain Length
page is reclaimed via our epoch-based memory garbage col-
lector (Section III-D).
VI. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
This section provides experimental evaluation of the Bw-
tree when compared to a “traditional” B-tree architecture (Berke-
leyDB run in B-tree mode) as well as latch-free skiplists. Our
experiments use a mix of real-world and synthetic workloads
running on real system implementations. Since this paper fo-
cuses on in-memory aspects of the Bw-tree, our experiments
explicitly focus on in-memory system performance. Perfor-
mance evaluation on secondary storage will be the topic of
future work.
A. Implementation and Setup
Bw-Tree.
We
implemented
the
Bw-Tree
as
a
standalone
atomic
record
store
in
approximately
10,000 lines of C++ code. We use the Win32 native
InterlockedCompareExchange64 to perform the CAS
update installation. Our entire implementation was latch-free.
BerkeleyDB. We compare the Bw-tree to the BerkeleyDB
key-value database. We chose BerkeleyDB due to its good
performance as a standalone storage engine. Furthermore, it
does not need to traverse a query processing layer as done in
a complete database system. We use the C implementation of
BerkeleyDB running in B-tree mode, which is a standalone B-
tree index sitting over a buffer pool cache that manages pages,
representing a typical B-tree architecture. We use BerkeleyDB
in non-transactional mode (meaning better performance) that
supports a single writer and multiple readers using page-level
latching (the lowest latch granularity in BerkeleyDB) to max-
imize concurrency. With this conﬁguration, we believe Berke-
leyDB represents a fair comparison to the Bw-tree. For all
experiments, the BerkeleyDB buffer pool size is large enough
to accommodate the entire workload (thus does not touch
secondary storage).
Skip list. We also compare the Bw-tree to a latch-free skip
list implementation [13]. The skip list has become a popular
alternative to B-trees for memory-optimized databases3 since
they can be implemented latch-free, exhibit fast insert perfor-
mance, and maintain logarithmic search cost. Our implemen-
tation installs an element in the bottom level (a linked list)
using a CAS to change the pointer of the preceding element.
3The MemSQL in-memory database uses a skip list as its ordered index [14]
Failed Splits
Failed Consolidates
Failed Updates
Dedup
0.25%
1.19%
0.0013%
Xbox
1.27%
0.22%
0.0171%
Synthetic
8.88%
7.35%
0.0003%
TABLE I
LATCH-FREE DELTA UPDATE FAILURES
It decides to install an element at the next highest layer (the
skip list towers or “express lanes”) with a probability of 1
2.
The maximum height of our skip list is 32 layers.
Experiment machine. Our experiment machine is an Intel
Xeon W3550 (at 3.07GHz) with 24 GB of RAM. The machine
contains four cores that we hyperthread to eight logical cores
in all of our experiments.
Evaluation Datasets. Our experiments use three workloads,
two from real-world applications and one synthetic.
1) Xbox LIVE. This workload contains 27 Million get-set
operations obtained from Microsoft’s Xbox LIVE Prime-
time online multi-player game [15]. Keys are alpha-
numeric strings averaging 94 bytes with payloads av-
eraging 1200 bytes. The read-to-write ratio is approxi-
mately 7.5 to 1.
2) Storage deduplication trace. This workload comes from
a real enterprise deduplication trace used to generate
a sequence of chunk hashes for a root ﬁle directory
and compute the number of deduplicated chunks and
storage bytes. This trace contains 27 Million total chunks
and 12 Million unique chunks, and has a read to write
ration of 2.2 to 1. Keys are 20-byte SHA-1 hash values
that uniquely identify a chunk, while the value payload
contains a 44-byte metadata string.
3) Synthetic. We also use a synthetic data set that generates
8-byte integer keys with a 8-byte integer payload. The
workload begins with an index of 1M entries generated
using a uniform random distribution. It performs 42 mil-
lion operations with a read to write ratio of 5 to 1.
Defaults. Unless mentioned otherwise, our primary perfor-
mance metric is throughput measured in (Million) operations
per second. We use 8 worker threads for each workload, equal
to the number of logical cores on our experiment machine.
The default page size for both BerkeleyDB and the Bw-tree
is 8K (the skip list is a linked list and does not use page
organization).
B. Bw-Tree Tuning and Properties
In this section, we evaluate two aspects of the Bw-tree:
(1) the effect of delta chain length on performance and (2) the
latch-free failure rate for posting delta updates.
1) Delta chain length: Figure 5 depicts the performance
of the Bw-tree run over the Xbox and synthetic workloads
for varying delta chain length thresholds, i.e., the maximum
length a delta chain grows before we trigger page consol-
idation. For small lengths, worker threads perform consol-
idation frequently. This overhead cuts into overall system
performance. For the Xbox workload, search deteriorates for
sequential scans larger than four deltas. While sequential scans


10.40
3.83
2.84
0.56
0.66
0.33
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
12.0
Xbox
Synthetic
Deduplication
Operations/Sec (M)
BW-Tree
BerkeleyDB
Fig. 6.
Bw-tree and BerkeleyDB
over linked delta chains are good for branch prediction and
prefetching in general, the Xbox workload has large 100-byte
records, meaning fewer deltas will ﬁt into the L1 cache during
a scan. The synthetic workload contains small 8-byte keys,
which are more amenable to prefetching and caching. Thus,
delta chain lengths can grow longer (to about eight deltas)
without performance consequences.
2) Update Failure in Latch-Free Environment: Given the
latch-free nature of the Bw-tree, some operations will inevitably
fail in the race to update page state. Table I provides the
failure rate for splits, consolidates, and record updates for
each workload. The record update failure rate (e.g., inserts,
updates, deletes) is extremely low, below 0.02% for all work-
loads. Meanwhile, the failure rates for the split and consoli-
date operations are larger than the update failures at around
1.25% for both the Xbox and deduplication workloads, and
8.88% for the synthetic workload. This is expected, since
splits and consolidates must compete with the faster record
update operations. However, we believe these rates are still
manageable. The synthetic workload failure rates represent
a worst-case scenario. For the synthetic data, preparing and
installing a record update delta is extremely fast since records
are extremely small. In this case, a competing (and more
expensive) split operation trying to install its delta on the same
page has a high probability of failure.
C. Comparing Bw-tree to a Traditional B-tree Architecture
This experiment compares the in-memory performance of
the Bw-tree to BerkeleyDB4, representing a traditional B-
tree architecture. Figure 6 reports the results for the Xbox,
deduplication, and synthetic workloads run on both systems.
For the Xbox workload, the Bw-tree exhibits a throughput of
10.4M operations/second, while BerkeleyDB has a throughput
of 555K operations/second, representing a speedup of 18.7x.
The throughput of both systems drops for the update-intensive
deduplication workload, however the Bw-tree maintains a 8.6x
speedup over BerkeleyDB. The performance gap is closer
for the synthetic workload (5.8x Bw-tree speedup) due to
the higher latch-free failure rates observed for the Bw-tree
observed in Section VI-B.2.
4We use BerkeleyDB’s memp stat function to ensure it runs in memory
Bw-tree
Skip List
Synthetic workload
3.83M ops/sec
1.02M ops/sec
Read-only workload
5.71M ops/sec
1.30M ops/sec
TABLE II
BW-TREE AND LATCH-FREE SKIP LIST
In general, we believe two main aspects lead to the supe-
rior performance of the Bw-tree: (1) Latch-freedom: no thread
blocks on updates or reads on the Bw-tree, while BerkeleyDB
uses page-level latching to block readers during updates, re-
ducing concurrency. The Bw-tree executes with a processor
utilization of about 99% while BerkeleyDB runs at about 60%.
(2) CPU cache efﬁciency: since the Bw-tree uses delta records
to update immutable base pages, the CPU caches of other
threads are rarely invalidated on an update. Meanwhile, Berke-
leyDB updates pages in place. An insert into a typical B-
tree page involves including a new element in vector of key-
ordered records, on average moving half the elements and
invalidating multiple cache lines.
D. Comparing Bw-tree to a Latch-Free Skip List
We also compare the performance of the Bw-tree to a latch-
free skip list implementation. The skip list provides key-ordered
access with logarithmic search overhead, and can easily be
implemented in a latch-free manner. For these reasons, it is
starting to receive attention as a B-tree alternative in memory-
optimized databases [14]. The ﬁrst row of Table II reports the
results of the synthetic workload run over both the Bw-tree
and the latch-free skiplist. The Bw-tree outperforms the skip
list by a factor of 3.7x. To further investigate the source of the
Bw-tree performance gain, we ran both systems using a read-
only workload that performs 30M key lookups on an index
of 30M records. We report these results in the second row of
Table II, showing the Bw-tree with a 4.4x performance advan-
tage. These results suggest the Bw-tree has a clear advantage
in search performance. We suspect this is due to the Bw-tree
having better CPU cache efﬁciency than the skip list, which
we explore in the next section.
E. Cache Performance
This experiment measures the CPU cache efﬁciency of the
Bw-tree compared to the skip list. We use the Intel VTune
proﬁler5 to capture CPU cache hit events while running the
read-only workload on each system. The workload was run
single-threaded in order to collect accurate statistics. Figure 7
plots the distribution of retired memory loads over the CPU
cache hierarchy for each system. As we expected, the Bw-tree
exhibits very good cache efﬁciency compared to the skip list.
Almost 90% of its memory reads come from either the L1
or L2 cache, compared to 75% for the skip list. We suspect
the Bw-tree’s search efﬁciency is the primary reason for this
difference. The skip list must traverse a physical pointer before
every comparison to traverse to the next “tower” or linked list
record at a particular level. This can cause erratic CPU cache
behavior, especially when branch prediction fails. Meanwhile,
5http://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/intel-vtune-ampliﬁer-xe/


0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Bw-tree
Skiplist
L1 hits
L2 hits
L3 hits
RAM
Fig. 7.
Cache efﬁciency
Bw-tree search is cache-friendly since most of its time is spent
performing binary search on a base page of keys compacted
into a contiguous memory block (a few deltas may be present
as well). This implies the Bw-tree will do much less pointer
chasing than the skip list.
The cache friendliness of the Bw-tree becomes clearer when
we consider the set of nodes accessed in each data structure
up to the point of reaching the data page. Over all possible
search pathways, this is precisely the set of internal nodes in
the Bw-tree, which is 1% or less of the occupied memory. For
the skip list, this is about 50% of the nodes. So, for a given
cache size, more of the memory accesses involved in a search
hit the cache for Bw-tree over skip list.
VII. RELATED WORK
We have beneﬁtted from prior work and in some cases have
built upon it.
A. B-trees
Anyone working with B-trees owes a debt to Bayer and
McCreight [16]. The variant that we use is the B+tree [9]. We
stretch the meaning of “page-oriented” by exploiting elastic
pages, in discontiguous pieces. The notion of elastic pages
evolved from the hashed access method record lists used by
SkimpyStash [8]. Like SkimpyStash, we consolidate the dis-
contiguous pieces of a “page” when we do garbage collection.
B. Latch Free
Until our work, it was not clear that B-trees could be made
lock or latch-free. Skip lists [13] serve as an alternative latch-
free “tree” when multiple threads must access the same page.
Partitioning is another way to avoid latches so that each thread
has its own partition of the key space [17], [18]. The Bw-tree
avoids the overhead of partitioning by using the compare and
swap (CAS) instruction for all state changes, including the
“management” state changes, e.g., SMOs and ﬂushes
C. Flash Based, Log Structured
Early work with ﬂash storage exploited in-page logging
[19], placing log records near a B-tree page instead of updating
the page “in-place” which would require an erase cycle. While
our delta records resemble somewhat in-page log records, they
have nothing to do with transactional recovery. We view them
not as log records, but as the new versions of the records.
Transactional log records, if they exist at all, are elsewhere.
We gain our latch-free capability from these deltas as well.
We have treated our ﬂash SSD as a generic storage device.
Hence, we have not tried to exploit parallelism within it, as
done by [20]. Exploiting this parallelism might well provide
even higher performance than we have achieved thus far.
Log structuring was ﬁrst applied to ﬁle systems [12]. But
the approach is now more widely used for both disks and as
the translation layer for ﬂash. In our system, we use solid state
disks, i.e. ﬂash based devices that are accessed via the tradi-
tional I/O interface and use a translation layer. Despite this,
we implemented our own log structured store. This enabled us
to pack pages together in our buffer so that no empty space
exists on ﬂash. Further, it permitted us to blur the distinction
between a page store and a record store. This reduces even
further the storage consumed in ﬂushing pages. Storage sav-
ings improve LSS performance as garbage collection, which
consumes cycles, ampliﬁes writes, and wears out ﬂash, is the
largest cost in log structuring.
D. Combination Efforts
Earlier indexes have used some of the elements above, though
not in exactly the same way. Hyder [21] uses a log structured
store built on ﬂash memory. In Hyder, all changes propagate
to the root of the tree. The changes at the root are batched, and
the paths being included are compressed. Hyder, at least in one
mode, supports transactions directly, with their log structured
store used as both the database and the log. We do not do that,
relying instead on a transactional component when transaction
support is desired.
BFTL [22] is another example of an index implemented
over log structured ﬂash. It is perhaps the closest to the Bw-
tree among earlier work in how it’s b-tree manages storage. It
has a mapping table, called a node translation table, and writes
deltas (in our terminology) to ﬂash. It also has a process for
making the deltas contiguous on ﬂash when the number of
deltas gets large. However, the BTFL b-tree does not handle
multi-threading, concurrency control and cache management,
topics that we view as crucial to providing high throughput
performance for an atomic record store.
VIII. DISCUSSION
A. Performance Results
Our Bw-tree implementation achieves very high performance.
And it is sufﬁciently complete that we can measure normal
operation performance reliably and consistently. We exploit
the database ability to cache updates until it is convenient to
post them to stable storage. This is a key to database system
performance, and is explicitly enabled via control operations
in the Deuteronomy architecture’s interface between TC and
DC. However, exploiting it, as we have done, means that one
needs to be careful in comparing Bw-tree performance with
atomic record stores that immediately make update operations
stable.


B. Log Structured Store
We have focused this paper on the Bw-tree part of our
atomic record store (ARS) or data component (DC). Thus, we
have not discussed issues related to managing LSS. A latch-
free environoment is very challenging for many elements of
data management systems, including storage management as
done by our LSS. We will describe details of how the LSS is
implemented in another paper. Here we want to provide a few
highlights of areas needing attention.
• We manage our ﬂush buffer in a latch-free way. To our
knowledge this has not been done before. This means that
there is no thread blocking when items are posted to the
buffer.
• We use system transactions to capture Bw-tree structure
modiﬁcation operations (SMOs). This ensures that each
SMO can be considered atomic during recovery.
• We must keep main memory state consistent with the
state being written to LSS, non-trivial without latches.
We gave much thougth to this subtle aspect in designing
the interface to the LSS.
C. In-Page Search Optimization
Our excellent performance results were achieved without
tuning search performance using a cache sensitive page search
technique [23], [24]. We expect further improvement in Bw-
tree search performance as a result of implementing techniques
like these. We have no concerns about update performance, as
we would continue to use our delta record technique for that,
with all of its advantages.
D. Conclusion
We have designed and implemented the Bw-tree such that
it can exist as a free standing atomic record store, be a data
component in a Deuteronomy style system, or be embedded in
a traditional database system. We have followed the classic ar-
chitecture of access method layered on cache manager layered
on storage manager. But at every level, we have introduced
innovations that stretch prior methods and tailor our system
for the newer hardware setting of multi-core processors and
ﬂash storage.
Our innovations, e.g. elastic pages, delta updates, shared
read-only state, latch-free operation, and log structured stor-
age, eliminate thread blocking, improve processor cache effec-
tiveness, and reduce I/O demands. These techniques should
work well in other settings as well, including hashing and
multi-attribute access methods.
We were acutely aware that we were implementing a com-
ponent that had been successfully implemented any number
of times. In such a case, when all is said and done, it is
system performance that determines whether the effort bears
fruit. While we were “conﬁdent” in our design choices, we
were nonetheless pleasantly surprised by how good the results
were. Supporting millions of operations per second on a single
“vanilla” cpu offers strong conﬁrmation for our design choices.
That we out-performed very good competing approaches by
such a large margin was “icing on the cake”.
REFERENCES
[1] “MongoDB. http://www.mongodb.org/.”
[2] J. J. Levandoski, D. B. Lomet, M. F. Mokbel, and K. Zhao, “Deuteron-
omy: Transaction Support for Cloud Data,” in CIDR, 2011, pp. 123–133.
[3] D. Lomet, A. Fekete, G. Weikum, and M. Zwilling, “Unbundling
Transaction Services in the Cloud,” in CIDR, 2009, pp. 123–133.
[4] C. Nyberg, T. Barclay, Z. Cvetanovic, J. Gray, and D. B. Lomet,
“AlphaSort: A Cache-Sensitive Parallel External Sort,” VLDB Journal,
vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 603–627, 1995.
[5] A. Ailamaki, D. J. DeWitt, M. D. Hill, and D. A. Wood, “DBMSs on
a Modern Processor: Where Does Time Go?” in VLDB, 1999, pp. 266–
277.
[6] “Amazon DynamoDB. http://aws.amazon.com/dynamodb/.”
[7] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, R. Haas, I. Iliadis, and R. Pletka, “Write
ampliﬁcation analysis in ﬂash-based solid state drives,” in Proceedings
of SYSTOR 2009: The Israeli Experimental Systems Conference, ser.
SYSTOR ’09, 2009, pp. 10:1–10:9.
[8] B. Debnath, S. Sengupta, and J. Li, “SkimpyStash: RAM Space Skimpy
Key-Value Store on Flash-based Storage,” in SIGMOD, 2011, pp. 25–36.
[9] D. Comer, “The Ubiquitous B-Tree,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 11, no. 2,
pp. 121–137, 1979.
[10] H. T. Kung and P. L. Lehman, “Concurrent manipulation of binary search
trees,” TODS, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 354–382, 1980.
[11] P. L. Lehman and S. B. Yao, “Efﬁcient Locking for Concurrent Opera-
tions on B-Trees,” TODS, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 650–670, 1981.
[12] M. Rosenblum and J. Ousterhout, “The Design and Implementation of a
Log-Structured File System,” ACM Trans. Comput. Syst., vol. 10, no. 1,
pp. 26–52, 1992.
[13] W. Pugh, “Skip Lists: A Probabilistic Alternative to Balanced Trees,”
Commun. ACM, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 668–676, 1990.
[14] “MemSQL Indexes.
http://developers.memsql.com/docs/1b/indexes.html.”
[15] “Xbox LIVE. http://www.xbox.com/live.”
[16] R. Bayer and E. M. McCreight, “Organization and Maintenance of Large
Ordered Indices,” Acta Inf., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 173–189, 1972.
[17] I. Pandis, P. T¨oz¨un, R. Johnson, and A. Ailamaki, “PLP: Page Latch-free
Shared-everything OLTP,” PVLDB, vol. 4, no. 10, pp. 610–621, 2011.
[18] J. Sewall, J. Chhugani, C. Kim, N. Satish, and P. Dubey, “PALM: Parallel
Architecture-Friendly Latch-Free Modiﬁcations to B+ Trees on Many-
Core Processors,” PVLDB, vol. 4, no. 11, pp. 795–806, 2011.
[19] S.-W. Lee and B. Moon, “Design of Flash-Based DBMS: An In-Page
Logging Approach,” in SIGMOD, 2007, pp. 55–66.
[20] H. Roh, S. Park, S. Kim, M. Shin, and S.-W. Lee, “B+-tree Index
Optimizations by Exploiting Internal Parallelism of Flash-based Solid
State Drives,” PVLDB, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 286–297, 2012.
[21] P. A. Bernstein, C. W. Reid, and S. Das, “Hyder - a transactional record
manager for shared ﬂash,” in CIDR, 2011, pp. 9–20.
[22] C.-H. Wu, T.-W. Kuo, and L. P. Chang, “An Efﬁcient B-tree Layer Im-
plementation for Flash-Memory Storage Systems,” ACM Trans. Embed.
Comput. Syst., vol. 6, no. 3, July 2007.
[23] S. Chen, P. B. Gibbons, T. C. Mowry, and G. Valentin, “Fractal
Prefetching B±Trees: Optimizing Both Cache and Disk Performance,”
in SIGMOD, 2002, pp. 157–168.
[24] D. B. Lomet, “The Evolution of Effective B-tree: Page Organization and
Techniques: A Personal Account,” SIGMOD Record, vol. 30, no. 3, pp.
64–69, 2001.


